BY CRAIG MOD
Things Become Other Things
Kissa by Kissa
Art Space T okyo
Koya Bound




This is an uncorrected ebook file. Please do not quote for
publication until you check your copy against the finished
book.
This is a work of nonfiction. Some names and identifying details have been changed.
Copyright © 2025 by Craig Mod
Penguin Random House values and supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity, encourages diverse voices, promotes
free speech, and creates a vibrant culture. Thank you for buying an authorized edition of this book and for complying
with copyright laws by not reproducing, scanning, or distributing any part of it in any form without permission. You are
supporting writers and allowing Penguin Random House to continue to publish books for every reader. Please note that
no part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner for the purpose of training artificial intelligence
technologies or systems.
All rights reserved.
Published in the United States by Random House, an imprint and division of Penguin Random House LLC, New York.
Random House and the House colophon are registered trademarks of Penguin Random House LLC.
The image on page 000 is copyright ©1988 MASH · ROOM/AKIRA COMMITTEE. All Rights Reserved. All other
images are courtesy of the author.
Hardback ISBN 9780593732540 International edition ISBN [insert] Ebook ISBN 9780593732564
[or insert CIP information and delete ISBNs above]
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper
randomhousebooks.com
$PrintCode
FIRST EDITION
Book design by Barbara M. Bachman
To Mizuki
CONTENTS
Cover
Ebook Information
By Craig Mod
Title Page
Copyright
Dedication
Map
Preface
Prologue
HOWDY
WALKERS
WATCH SHOP
OBJECTS AND ARCHETYPES
THE OWNER OF AN INN
JOHN
IPPON-URA
INVIT ATIONS
THINGS BECOME OTHER THINGS
WHA T TO BELIEVE
EVER YONE
ISE
LANGUAGE
AROUND HERE
MARUT ANBO
LOGGERS
YUKA TA
THE ROPE
THA T FIGHTING IMPULSE
FLAME TREE
ANTS
KISSA  VEIL
OCEAN
SHITHOLES AND NOT  SHITHOLES
I SPEAK WITH A FARMER
METH
HANKO
SCALE
DISP ATCH: ANIMALS
HAMLETS
GUNS
TOUGH
FISHING POLES
FLA TTEN THE MOUNT AIN
GEISHA
CANNED COFFEE
VENDING
THA T FLOA TING FEELING
KII-KA TSUURA
COPPER
ONE QUICK WALK
THE BOA T
PARKINSONS
KŌY A FIRE
DEET
COBAL T
HONGŪ
IMMUT ABLE STUFF
GYŪBA
SHALLOW  ROOTS
FARMER AND HIS CA T
NACHI F ALLS
ASCETIC PRACTICE
SHOTGUN SHACKS
OKONOMIY AKI
DISP ATCH: THE HOTEL
KISSA  RON
SPIRALS
THE BLUE HOME
SEAMUS
ZELDA
LUCK
THE “BOOK OF JOHN”
LIGHTER
DISP ATCH: CHILDREN
FOLSOM
ASSO
A FINISH
EPILOGUE
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
ABOUT  THE AUTHOR

 
They say the great typhoon of 1889 filled the air of Kii with a mythic kinda
rage. Meiji 22: The black skies cracked, and down it came. Waters rocked.
Rivers rose. That towering torii of Hongū Grand? Fell hard. The holy land
went all mush, they say, earth unstuck, undulated like the ocean. Above—
three-legged oily rascals wheel ed and cawed and surveyed the slop. For
when that divin e mayhem of all-penetrating wetness finally pulled back,
they say Hongū had been reduc ed to a slurry . Mud, mud, and more damn
mud. Shrines and homes swep t halfway down the Peninsula, shattered,
floating of f into a dead-still sea.


 
B.—allow me to begin again, just for you.
Why am I drawn back to this place? To this peninsula, the Kii Peninsula?
This once-wiped-clean land of lost villages and dusty roads, of fallen-
pilgrim graves and boats stuck in the earth? In part, it’s because they say the
stone here suffers few dickhea ds, is happy to chuck you off given the
slightest vanity . Us—two dickhe ads without vanity , from a place that never
knew vanity: buzzed skulls, stained T-shirts and jeans, sneakers with half-
attached soles. Walking these roads and ridges you’d have made it for sure,
I know this now. Touching this rock, walking these paths, I’ve found an
unexpected peace in these recondite hinterlands.
I admir e the old road and rock, but the people—their stories, their
immutable connection to this place—have brought me back again and
again. Their language enchants: a delightfully foul mellifluousn ess, a soiled
twang we know well. And it’s these people and their words that make me
think of you more than anything else.
It’s been  a lifetime since I’ve written your name: Bryan. (There it is.)
Written with a “y” not an “i.” The only “true” way to write it as far as I’m
concerned. A name that never left my mind. (How could it?) Bryan . But it
wasn’ t until this walk that you returned to me in full. Why now? I don’t
know . Maybe I’d just seen enough, finally . Was finally brave enough to
look back.
Here’ s what I do know: This world turns and turns and the more I move
my feet the more I believe in things we never understood. Life,
irrepressible, it billows over the top of the pot, man. Let me be your eyes as
best as I can. I’ll bear witness to this wonder you never got to see.

HOWDY
Twenty-seven years since we last spoke, a catch-up is in order . Here are the
broad facts: I’m now forty-one. I moved to Japan when I was nineteen. I
walk a lot, mostly alone, always compulsively , down these old Japanese
roads.
I walk twenty , thirty, sometimes forty or more kilometers until my feet
feel wonky, hot in spots, mince d. Until I’m sure I can’t take another step.
And then do the same thing again the next day. And then the next. Repeat
this for weeks, months. I do this easily , as if my body has been  waiting for
this my whole life. I photograph those I meet, the things I see, the banalities
of life I pass. I dictate my observations and thoughts into a recorder, talking
to myself like that bag lady who roamed our suburban sidewalks, who
walked past our homes. (Why didn’ t any of us try to help her?) Each night,
I spend three or four or five hours collating the photographs, compiling my
notes, doing laundry , chatting with inn owners, creating an archive. Where
does it all go? Here, you’re holding it. The whole thing, an ascetic practice.
I even shave my head like some  performative mendicant, one who lives off
stories as alms. This is a walk, yes, but also a series of relatio nships with
people and objects: purpose wrought from a slideshow of faces, old tales,
new tales, histories, fields, forest climbs, pachinko parlors, and pine trees.
...
Down the road I see what might be a kissa,  an old café. These have become
my favorite places of all the places in the world— kissaten  or kissa for short,
Japanese cafés with the air of mid-century American diners but entirely of
their own mirror -world aesthet ic. Low Formica tables, low seats. “Sofa
seats,” they’re called. (I love that— sofa seats .) Kissas are smoky , creaky
community hubs. Sit in the right one for an hour and, if nothing else, you’ll
understand the town a bit better . The oncoming shop’ s canvas awnings look
like they’ve been shredded by storms. The place looks abando ned, let me
tell you. Like it had been murdered and thrown in a ditch, pulled out,
assessed, deeme d worthless, dumped back in. But the day is hot and I’m
thirsty and the sign says “Howdy .”
Inside, the owner is head-down in a newspaper , smoldering cigarette aloft
in hand. She doesn’ t look up.
Ain’t got no toast, she says. (They often serve toast.)
You got iced cof fee?
Yeah, we got iced cof fee. (They always  serve iced cof fee.)
The place is empty . I use the toilet, which is in great shape— old-style
ceramic hole in a porcelain-tiled floor . A toilet from a different era, one that
requires good balance, haunches like a sumo wrestler ’s. I once saw a toilet
made specifically for the emperor . It was in a small village along another
historic route called the Kiso-ji, far from this kissa.
Hundreds of years ago, rumor  had it, the emperor was going to pass
through. God forbid he need to shit. So they made a beaut iful toilet—
wooden. (Yes, a wooden toilet.)  A hole in the floor , perfectly oblong, lined
with aromatic cypress, filled with sand, with a nice little handle poking up
at one end to aid with balance. Hitch up your kimono, hold on, that sort of
thing. The ceilin g was of a delicate woven thatch. Truly, a slyly cultivated
place to empty your guts. Why a pit of sand, as if the emperor were a cat?
Because his stool needed to be checked. There was an official sifter . A man
who analyzed all imperial bowe l movements to make sure the godhead was
OK. What a job. These things exist, believe it or not. The stories we tell
ourselves, the way we eleva te this human over another human—so
arbitrary , so bizarre. That toilet in the middle of nowhere never did get used.
But the town enshrined it in a way, keeps it on display . You can go visit if
you’re nearby .
Here in Howdy , the toilet is more or less the same, but with plumbing—
not sand—and has clearly been used a few thousand times. Next to it sits a
dented-up alumi num ashtray . The place once filled with tobacco smoke, still
suffused with the exhaust of a thousand smokers. Over the last decade, laws
changed as the Olympics approached. (The Olympics changed Tokyo in
1964 and once again in 2020.) When I first arrived in 2000, everyone
seemed to smoke everywhere. You’d have to shower three times to get the
smoke out of your hair. But now it’s more strict. Hardly anyw here allows
smoking anymo re. These old kissas are the last holders-on. And they mainly
keep it going in reverence to their regulars, who’ve smoked  here every
morning for most of their long lives.
I return from the toilet and the iced coffee is already on my table. The
owner looks like she hasn’ t moved, like the coffee had made itself. I take a
sip. Wince, cough. It’s unexpec tedly sweet. Reminds me of coffee you get
at Annapurna base camp (one of the first places I ever advent ured on my
own): instant, loaded with sugar . I arrived at that base camp with my head
in the vise of altitude sickness. Above camp was a rocky lip on the edge of
the epic moraine. Unable to sleep, I hiked up alone at night, sweet coffee in
a small thermos tucked into my jacket, sat on the edge of that vast frozen
plain, looked out at the towering peaks of Machapuchare and Hiunchuli and
Singu Chuli and Gangapurna and, of course, the 8,000-meter god of
Annapurna itself, as the clock ticked over and I turned twenty-eight years
old, feeling as small and lost as anyone could feel in a place like that, a
place that felt like the moon. I didn’ t know it then, but I was coming to the
end of a tough decade, and things were finally going to change for the
better . In that moment, though, it took everything I had to keep myself from
diving of f the edge in the face of all that beauty and loneliness.
Clearing my throat I say, Long time, this place, huh? And the owner
laughs and says, Howdy? Running this place thirty-five years. Maybe
thirty-six. Prolly thirty-five.
Then, cackling some more: Heck, long enough. We could just shut it
down right now . Coulda shut it down a long while back.
Time runs differently on the Peninsula. It’s difficult to explain, but it’s
like time had stopped at a very arbitrary moment, forty years ago, and
everything left today staggers in circles, precision lost. I feel a softness in
this imprecision, a kind of absolution. Kii is as good a place as any to
meditate on the past. Folks here cultivate a healthy relationship  with decay .
The right storm could wipe it all clean overnight. And that’s fine, they
seemed to say , and sometimes outright say it.
I look around at the coffee equipment and stools. Lines of coffee tickets
are tacked up on the wall. Buy ten cups, get one free. That sort of thing.
Traditionally , kissas hold on to tickets for their regulars. Though whether
Howdy’ s regular s still draw breath is another question. In the corner , a glass
table with a joystick at each side and a video-game monitor embedded
underneath. The tables we adored as kids. Greasy pizza parlors, a quarter to
play Pac-Man,  summer hours lost like smoke. The screen is off, looks like
it had never been on. This broke a while? I ask. Ages, she says.
She doesn’ t question my presence, doesn’ t make a deal of the big pack
I’m hauling around. This is my first day walking in a while and I don’t have
much of a plan.  But finding Howdy, drinking this distressing iced coffee,
thinking about lifeless moraine s and imperial toilets—these all seem like
good signs to me. The goal is simply to do my “job,” to walk the old roads
of the Peninsula for thirty , mayb e forty days. We’ll see how it goes. I’m in
no rush.
The owner ’s cantankerous sprezzatura is impressive. She is impossibly
cool. Gives subzero fucks. Speaks vaguely , in riddles, like we’re playing
ping-pong with a wet sponge. Could have been talking about so much. Of
all thing s, we chat about government competency or incompetency . Virus
this, virus that. The world all goin’ sideways, she says, and don’t know if it
can right itself. Who knows where the virus lurks. And, heck, who cares.
Says, Can’t blame a person for wantin’  a drink. Any damn thing  could come
outta anyone anywhere at this point.
All I can do is laugh and agree.
With that, I finish the sweet liquid and pay and ask if I can photograph the
place. She relents with a grunt.
Cloudy day, pale light. A tobac co-stained Southern belle hangi ng on the
wall. This is how the decades sweep by .


WALKERS
Thirty days, maybe forty—this is my plan. The walking plan. I’m depressed
per se, no great emptiness has taken hold, but something is off, has been off
a while. I feel restless. Maybe it’s COVID—the sweep of the virus across
the earth. All that attendant solitude. Maybe I’ve just reached  a breaking
point of being home for over a year. The world’ s ground to a halt, Bryan,
and has stayed halted and we don’t know when it’s going to get unstuck. All
the busyness we use to ignore  trauma, to pretend like everything’ s OK,
well, that busyness has been erased cold turkey . The collective fear of any
damn thing coming outta anyone  is slathered all over our brains. I don’t
need a drink, but I need a walk. So I set off on this walk. May 2021. The
timing feels right to work things  over, things I’ve been ignoring  for nearly a
lifetime, and know of no better way to do so than to move my feet.
I’m embarrassed  to admit it, but the pandemic has been easy for me.
Heck, I’ve thrived. Because this is my job—the walking alone—I can keep
doing it, pretty much withou t restriction. From the walks I write, I
photograph, I make books. This is the life I find myself occupying, often in
disbelief.
You may wonder why I feel the pull to walk and walk alone and do so for
days and weeks and months at a time. As kids, I think it would  have made
sense without any explanation:  all this walking. Of course we walk. We
explor e. In a way, it’s all we had. You seeded that exploration in me, you set
markers on my mental horizon and pushed me to the edge of our town when
I didn’ t have the guts to do so on my own. But later on—on the path into
adulthood—many of us seem to lose this simple impulse to traverse dirt, to
push on the edges of what’ s known to us. We grow older and settle in and
the world shrinks, and the next time we lift our heads and survey things, it
can feel like we’ve been stuf fed into a suitcase.
Well, that never sat well with me. That shrinking. That self-stu ffing. You
know that. You felt that in me decades back, and I felt the same in you.
Both of us carrying an impulse to push, to break things to understand how
they worked, and in fixing them perhaps learn to fix others around us.
Seeing the edge of our town was a way to see the town itself, although we
never did get a good view , did we? And so ten years ago, in my early
thirties, I began expanding the circle of my known world by walking the
historic routes of Japan.
With that simple impulse to walk, my life was forever changed. I know
that soun ds hyperbolic, a bit bonkers, but it’s true. A walk? Life-changing?
Yes. What did I feel on the road that first time? Nothing explic it, nothing I
could name in the moment. Just the diffuse scent of purpose out there
between the villages and the trees and mountains. By that point , I had lived
in Japan  for over a decade (that I made it past thirty is still a bit
unbelievable, and the fact that I’ve now crested forty and, heck, fifty seems
possible are all facts I’m still wrapping my head around; how differently
would we have lived had we believed all this time was splayed  out before
us?) and was looking for the reason why, exactly , I had stayed so long, and
where my place might be in a country that would never see me as more than
a visitor. Here it was: to walk, and walk well, and witness the people along
the way. But why?  That’s the riddle I’m still figuring out. To believe? To
make others believe? You could say my eyes were opened. You could say I
had a “conversio n event.” Whatever you say, I was off walking whenever I
could. Months out of the year . Often on this peninsula.
The Kii Peninsu la sits as—and I feel like this is the easiest way to explain
it to you, though I hesitate, and yet here I go—the chubby dangl ing penis of
Japan. It hangs right down at the central belly of the Honshu landmass. A
little lonely , mostly mountains, extremely moist. (I know , I know .) Though
it has no explicitly clear physical northern boundary , you can think of its
northern edge as marked by the east-west line formed by Kobe, Osaka,
Nara City. Kyoto is farther north. It contains three prefectures: Mie,
Wakayama, and Nara. To the west is Osaka Bay and Japan’ s Shikoku
Island, home to the famous, grueling 88-Temple Pilgrimage. To the east and
south is the Pacific Ocean. It’s one of the rainiest places in the earth’ s
subtropical regio n. (More rain, even, than in the Amazon.) Its topography is
composed of temperate rainforest and logging forests. It is sliced up by
dozens of ancient paths and pilgrimage routes, all with individua l names but
many lumped together as the famous Kumano Kodō. Many of the routes are
just a few doze n kilometers in length, but together , it can take months to
walk them, years to fully piece them together , and a lifetime to know them.
On this walk, I’m sticking to the coast as much as possible. (None of this
will make sense  to you, so I placed a map in the front. Go, go take a peek.)
I’m starting with the Ise Kaid ō, walking to Ise Grand Shrine. Then heading
down the Ise-ji route to Kumano City, where I’ll grab the Hongū-do path
inland to Hong ū Grand Shrine. Then I’ll take the tough Nakahechi back
down to Nachi Falls, walk the streets to Kii-Katsuura, and finally catch the
Ōhechi around the southwestern coast up to Tanabe City. I’ll touch dense
forests on certai n days, but mainly I want to focus on the shrinking towns
and villages of fishermen working those salty waters. I want to see and hear
people, damnit.
...
The walk began yesterday in the northeast corner of the Peninsula at
Yokkaichi Statio n, where I disem barked a local train. A bit south of Nagoya,
where the original Tōkaidō—one of the two famous classic routes
connecting Kyoto and Tokyo—intersects with the Ise Kaid ō. These are old
roads, pilgrimage roads, some  in use for well over a thousand years.
Though today you’d hardly know it. Many of the roads of the Peninsula
look like those you’d find anyw here in the countryside: One- or two-lane
stretches of asphalt fringed with fields and gutters and mountains,
sometimes far of f, sometimes close. Not too dif ferent from where we began.
The start was not pleasant: I walked past the world’ s loneliest pine tree. I
walked past a pachinko gambling parlor . I walked past two, three, five,
seven, a dozen convenience stores—Family Marts, Lawsons, 7-Elevens. I
walked past a pharmacy the size of a baseball field. Cars and tractor -trailers
whizzed by. Ramen shops show ed off their noodles in glass cases caked in
exhaust. Curry shops spiced the air. A robot screamed at me about deals for
used cars. No one else walked . I was alone in the walk. Drivers seemed
hesitant to make eye contact.
And then, just like that, the path veered at the Hinaga-n o-Oiwake
junction, narrow ed, went back away from the busy road and then farther
away still. Cars vanished. So did the convenience stores. The pharmacies
turned into rice paddies, the horizon appeared dotted with mountains.



What I saw: A home with a beautifully manicured tree. A driveway
blocked by cones cast in golden morning light. Behind them, fields. This
time of the year they glisten like shallow ponds. Seedlings poke up above
the water in neat rows. Crows hop between, look for worm s, squawk.
Kudzu envelops  homes and telephone poles. Kilometers pass. The rural
landscape seems to set. You can hear the nightingales sing.
...
The road slips by and the worki ng-class tone of the landscape, the farming
machinery , the lumber equipm ent, the quietude stamped atop it all by
COVID causes my mind to drift back across the ocean. I think about the
town we grew up in—our blue-collar , post-industrial home— and I think
about you because the town is nothing to me without you. A town once
filled with hardworking folks commuting to the bottling plant or nearby
armory or airplane-engine facto ry. As industry left, problems mounted. We
saw that, we felt it. (Though we had nothing to compare it to, knew nothing
else but our town.) Decades ago I escaped its complicated gravity . My
ability to even think about college was thanks to my mother . She began
saving at age twenty , years before she was married or even knew she’d
adopt me. I didn’t know much, but I knew that I needed to be as far away as
possible. I found three Japane se universities that had English websites.
Applied on a whim and got into one. Tuition was a fraction of what we
were told college should cost.
Arriving in Tokyo at age nineteen, this is what I felt: exciteme nt, terror ,
disbelief, salvati on. How could it be that I was here? A citysca pe we knew
only post-apocalyptically from a bootleg copy of that now-cult-classic
animated film AKIRA . Now I was in it, the landscape of that film. Those
first steps I took outside the borders of our town felt like kickin g myself in
the nuts over and over. Each step, another smack. Because in each step I felt
so clearly our deficits. Holy smokes, were we running on fumes. Everyone I
met in the great city seemed so much better prepared—for life, love, sanity .
The city of Tokyo itself, too, its clockwork precision, maintained at an
unfathomable scale, broke my mind. Unlike our town, there were no guns,
no drugs , few homeless. I felt a peace I never knew was possible amid so
much movemen t. It put the few other cities I had seen to shame. Packed
trains crisscrossed above and below , filled with purpose-driven women and
men buttoned up with a consiste nt formality that didn’ t exist back home. A
whole army of resolve on the move, dressed for the part. Entire  blocks rose
in chunk s of concrete and glass  again and again and again from the bay to
the horizon, their buildings separated by just a hair’s breadth.  Cars deftly
negotiated alleys  barely their width. Not a scrap of garbage anywhere. Little
kids walked to school in shorts year-round, families bathed together ,
confusing food lurked around every corner . That first year I fell madly in
love—with the promise of the cityscape, alcohol, language. But more than
any of that, I fell in love with long walks, of being subtly changed by the
lives I heard behind open windows. That very first shot in Akira —the one
after the boom, the anonymous alley with the blinking rectangular sign—
that image was seared into my mind and I spent countless nights  looking for
it (still looking for it now, a quarter of a century later). I had my heart
broken more times than I could  count, and drank myself into the pavement
just as often. When all you feel are deficiencies, accepting love from a
person or even a place is like trying to fart yourself to the moon. So I kept
my feet and body moving. Spent weeks hitchhiking from coast to coast,
drinking, waking  up on the floors of homes I had no memory of arriving at.
Was given rides  by lonely folks commuting on their own, with their own
myriad deficits. They bought me donuts, they drove me to cafés on the side
of the highway , they smoked slowly without saying a thing, they stared at
their cigarettes and rolled the ash off in plastic ashtrays. I helped push a
tractor -trailer up a snowy road just outside Hiroshima, nearly dying in the
process.
And that was just the first six months.
I was very much  a fool, flailing,  overwhelmed, unable to process even the
thinnest sliver of what I saw, but I recognize that even amid the confusion
and blackouts, these were my first days truly out in the world exploring.
Filling my brain with archet ypes of people and social and political
structures we never imagined possible.
...
Since then I’ve learned that Japan was once a country filled with
remarkable pilgrim walkers. Pilgrims who’d regularly clock ten ri a day.
One ri is about four kilometers. They were marked off by ichi-ri-zuka
milestones—hulking mounds of dirt alongside the road. There are a few left
to be spotted if you know what to look for. When I pass them I like to think
of the millions who walked before me over the centuries and yell out to
them—both the mounds and the dead— ICHI-RIIIII,  for no particular
reason. It just feels good and dumb and right.
The old walkers  wore waraji  straw sandals, bought for five sen, or five
hundredths of a yen. A fraction of a penny . Blew through a few pairs a day,
the spent ones recycled as animal feed. They carried their lives on their
backs. As my body complains on my own walks, I keep these  strong men
and women in mind.
Given time, these roads shift. A shed-sized Baptist church appe ars, a hill
is now neatly covered in concrete, a home subsumed by kudzu. Historically ,
many of these roads have been  reconfigured by capricious war machines.
Cities reduced to ashen frame s. A city that was bombed? You feel its
aborted history in architectural blandness. A loss of something bigger than
the city itself. But alongside that loss, even today , a connection to the deep
past can persist. A nearb y, previously dilapidated and seemingly abandoned
woodland shrine is suddenly , mysteriously , renewed with fresh, glowing
timber .
...
I’ve walked these Peninsula roads before, many times. Over and over I’ve
returned to Kii, a place disappe aring before your eyes from depopulation,
and yet a place with an incredib le, beautiful, inspiring history of syncretic
Buddhist and Shinto theology and philosophy . Visiting now—while those
who knew parts  of the old Peninsula are still alive, while some of the old
shops are still around—feels paramount.
I’ve come to crave the solitude and asceticism of these solo walks. There
is no quieter place on earth than the third hour of a good long day of
walking. It’s alone in this space , this walk-induced hypnosis, that the mind
is finally able to receive the strange gifts and charities of the world. If that
sounds like woo-woo nonsense, it feels even more woo-woo to experience.
On certa in stretches of this battered peninsula, when the quiet  and light
are just right, in those eerie hours of the walk, I’m reminded of you, Bryan
—and how we stalked backyard ravines murky with sewer water , turned
whatever scrap we could into treasure, lived as soiled dukes behind our
broken town, stinking of crabgrass and skunk cabbage.
Had someone told us back then that the key to it all lay in deliberate
repetition, we would have never believed them. Told them to f’ off. We
knew better , always knew better . (And we did, in a way.) But it’s true.
Damn, it’s true: I’ve come to realize the only true walk is the re-walk. You
cannot know a place without returning. And even then, once isn’t enough.
That’ s why I’m back. Back on the Peninsula. Walking these roads I’ve
walked before. It’s only through time and distance and effort—concerted,
present effort, controlled attention, a gentle and steady gaze upon it all—
that you begin to understand certain connections. That old wounds might
make sense. That the shape of once-dark paths becomes clear .
WATCH SHOP
Up ahead, an old man leads a group of even older women. They’re on a
local temple tour and stand in front of a roadside altar about the size of a
food truck. Come, come, he motions to me.
We place our heads next to one another ’s—the closest I’ve been to a
stranger in months—to peek through the structure’ s narrow wooden lattice.
He speaks almost as if trying to kiss my neck—hot breath on the ear felt
through his mask—launching into a reverie directed towar d the dark
interior . Points up to the old beams, lays out the history of the statues in
broad strokes. These figures, he says, pointing to the buddh as, are for
salvation. And these figures—h is finger now lingering over the jizō—are
for lost children and travelers. Women who have had miscarriages pray to
them. And walkers, for a thousand years, to the same ones.
Damn, you know , I begin to say as we pull our heads from the darkness, I
love this stretch of road, the Ise Kaid ō. Just three days or so of walking but
it’s charming, in a way. His gang of blue-permed ladies listens intently with
big smiles from a COVID-safe distance. I’ve walked a bunch of Japan, and
this road is quiet, unexpectedly well preserved, hasn’ t yet been completely
transformed into a string of pachinko parlors or chain ramen shops or big-
box pharmacies like some of the other roads.
Yes, he says. Well … this wasn’t firebombed during the war like the
industrial areas up north there around Nagoya. So this road—th e Ise Kaid ō
—is in good shape.
He then asks, What is your country?
I chuckle because I am nervous and embarrassed and to defuse the tension
of what I am about to say, and then say (because it feels like it can’t be
helped, so why not introduce it all sloppy and naked and true),
Unfortunately I’m from the country that did all the firebombing.
He laughs.
It’s just … unim aginable, I say, standing here now, chatting with you, that
any of that happened.
Strange thing, he says, history . The mess of our past, still touching us
today . Far back now , far back, can’ t be helped.
He was being kind, demurring, tempering my clumsiness. But for nearly
eighty years, the airplane-engin e factory employed most of our town. My
grandparents met there. My parents met there. Bryan, I know you had
family there, too. Everyone did.
That factory stoked a hundred thousand homes. Gave my grandparents a
great life. It was also the factory that made some of the engines that
powered the planes that firebo mbed these towns. The Wasp and Double
Wasp, air-cooled radial engines. My grandfather—a man who had the
profile of a Shakespearean actor with kind eyes and a large elegant nose,
flat-footed, high-school-educated, a guy who joined the cheerleading team
to watch  footba ll games because he couldn’ t afford tickets—would have
been there, working the floor near my grandmother on the days the
firebombings happened. Both widgets themselves in a system of baffling
scale, working one of the only jobs in town. My mom wasn’ t born until a
decade later . Who knows what this tour guide’ s dad did.
Those firebombings of Japan were lunatic and indiscriminate, incinerated
sixty-seven cities. Over half a million dead. That’ s like everyone in our
town killed, ten times over. Kyoto was saved by consequence of a lone man
high up in the ranks and his recognition of its cultural import. No city’s fate
should rest upon the whims of one man half a world away . But it did. It did
rest on the whim s of one man. Too much power , too arbitrary . I feel this in
my bones on the walk. The walk—its slowness, talking to those who
remain, walking through those cities with suspended timelines—shows me
this in a way nothing else does,  these gradients of past violence , this plain-
spun stupidity .
And yet, here today we stand as two men without malice, some eighty
years after all that tumult. Then, two countries colliding in the most horrible
of possib le ways, the worst of timelines. Today , with a benign life-affirming
dorkiness, a shared interest in history and old roads. Me, a goof, alone,
walking a largely forgotten stretch of road (I’ve never seen another person
walking the entire Ise Kaid ō), and this guy leading some retirees on an
afternoon jaunt. It was enough to make you believe things might be OK.
I bow to them all and shout, Sorry to have interrupted your tour! And they
all titter and—mimicking typing in the air—say , No no no! Have fun on
your walk and write about this! Tell people about the Ise Kaid ō!
...
Hours later: pouring rain, hiding in a café. They serve cake like we used to
eat—angel food cake. Simple and light. The only cake I remember us eating
as kids. Did our parents know any other? Made from a box mix, hard to
mess up. Here, I’m sure, whippe d up from scratch. I order it with an excited
chirp. Records line the back wall of the shop. There is a mismatched
wooden furniture aesthetic. Behind the counter stand a husband and wife.
High on coffee, I chat with the owners. They look thirty . Turns out they’re
both about forty-five, opened the shop some sixteen years ago. They’ll end
up being two of the youngest adults I see on the whole walk.
The husband pulls out a photo graph. Take a peek at this, he says. My
grandpa standin’  out front. This was his place, he says with no small dollop
of pride . A watch shop. Ran for two generations, almost a hundred years.
Shut down twenty back, he says. Left all empty and musty . Seemed a
shame. So my wife and I cleaned it up, started this café. Zero training, two
rookies, he says, chuckling, just dove straight in.
...
Later , I walk the day’s last few kilometers headfirst into driving rain and the
wind races past my ears and turns the world into a white-noise machine. I
think about war and erasure. Of how a single cypress pillar in the center of
a home has seen a story spannin g centuries. Of how bombs turn that history
to smok e. Of how you feel the ahistorical newness of the architecture in a
targeted city like Nagoya. How it feels laden with a cultural and memorial
poverty . How other cities—cit ies like Nara, cities untouched by war—
contain tapestries of life, history , tradition in their wooden structures, the
delightful circui ty of streets, their generationally helmed shop s. And as I
walk I can’t stop thinking about what is or isn’t left on the road beside me.
What did or didn’ t make it. Cakes, roadside shrines, broken video-game
tables, too-sweet iced coffee, still here—but why? Suddenly the landscape
seems so fragile, so easy to imag ine all of this gone, emptied out. Just wood
and mem ories and dwindling stories. Char the wood and remov e the people
and those timeli nes terminate. But on my right is a working rice farm, dirt
turned over for a century , and on my left a prewar dry-good s store, still
displaying rakes  and bamboo brooms. And, behind me now, beyond the
fields, a well-loved café run by a grandson and his wife, giving new life to
an old watch shop. A shop saved by chance—by dint of a handful of
kilometers, a centimeter on a paper map—from bombs, fire, violence,
annihilation, the mess of our past.
OBJECTS AND ARCHETYPES
Bryan, what did we want as kids? Oh, we wanted a gun—a Colt M191 1. It
was in our blood and the air; the Colt factory just down the road. We
wanted that gun and we wanted a laser sight for the gun and we wanted dirt
bikes. I remember us sitting on the school bus in the winter , vinyl seats
covered with smooth lighter burns, fingering basic math on fogged
windows, calculating the numbe r of years between then and owning those
things, and how crestfallen we were realizing how long we had to wait.
Laws, dumb laws. Come on, just let us have  ’em. A gun … a laser sight … a
dirt bike. I can now see that those objects represented power , technology ,
mobility . Three things we had none of. Neither of our families could afford
a computer , but we had a Nintendo and Zelda.  That got us a good part of the
way somewhere . A single golden cartridge containing that greater sense of
more—a wider world. An object with an incantation: “Made in Japan.” A
place farther away than we could ever imagine. It exists, and it makes these
objects of delight. That’ s what the cartridge said. Is that where Japan gained
purchase in my mind? Perha ps. It is certainly my first memory of
somewhere else, made concrete through an escape that was a game. In the
end, we never got the guns (thou gh many around us did), or the laser sights,
or the dirt bikes. But we played that game, we knew its world as well as we
knew our backy ard ravine. Both, worlds that couldn’ t hurt us but we could
master—the game and the ravin e. We knew them as well as we knew which
streets in town to avoid. There,  on our small TVs in blocky pixels was a
map, and even today I remember where to bomb for the secret caves.

...
I often think back, Bryan. Who surrounded us? Some good folks, yes, but
also many stuck folks. My mom ’s boyfriend lived in a trailer park. Who did
I want to shoot so precisely? Not him. He was bearded, a truck driver ,
usually kind. Someone who skirted but never quite ascended to the role of
father figure. He drank. Others  drank. Around us: a troupe of alcoholics
trapped in tiny, constricting loops, in varying states of struggle and
confusion. My father—my adoptive one, the only one I knew , that guy I
saw now and then for just a few hours—taught me one thing in the entirety
of his life: The floor of the movie theater is the garbage. I must have been
five or six. We were seated, waiting for the movie to start, eating Sour Patch
Kids and hotdogs. He was heari ng-impaired, and so everything  was yelled.
LOOK, he said as he threw half a hotdog onto the floor , THE FLOOR IS
THE GARBAGE. SOMEONE WILL COME AND CLEAN IT UP AT THE
END OF THE MOVIE.
He was so proud of the move, considered it a great insight, valuable
knowledge: The floor is the garbage. That’ s it. I’ve racked my brain as I
walk and walk and walk and can’t think of anything else. Could it be, a
decade of teaching in one sentence? Mostly , I remember anti-patterns.
Teaching in what-not-to-dos. Once, at a red light, he rolled down his
window and whistled at a road biker in spandex. It turned out it was a guy,
gave us the finger . I nearly burst into flames. But my father just hooted:
ASS LIKE A WOMAN, FACE OF A MAN! and drummed on the steering
wheel. A high school graduate (I think?), obsessed with horse  racing, he
made terrible sounds from deep inside his throat when Samantha Fox
appeared on TV, and farted unrepentantly (often in the movie theater , often
sending people around us gaspin g, running). This was not a man who made
laws to govern our world, not a man who could fix things. He hadn’ t the
slightest idea of how garbage worked, let alone life itself, let alone how to
unlock its mysteries, to be delighted, to be metacognizant,  to present
anything to us kids other than those anti-patterns. Soon after the wedding,
he anno unced to my mother , IN THIS HOUSE WOMAN I AM JESUS
CHRIST . Thankfully , my mom  had the support of her parents and good
sense—their legal arrangement lasted just a scant few years.

I want to go back and shake that skinny , flatulent man (so many
irrepressible farts—I mean, you simply cannot imagine the fartage) and say,
Dude, the floor is not the garbage. Say, Hold on to that shit and throw it out
properly . Impart a little pride or valor on the guy. Clearly no one else ever
had. He remains in my memory  a constellation of deficits. But the more I
walk, the less I can blame him for his deficits, his extreme  defects of
personality . This father of mine  had no positive archetypes. Bereft of love,
he was born into a scarcity all his own. Born into the curse of the town. His
own father also hardly educated, alcoholic (and then his stepfather , the
same, almost a clone). Contributed mainly violence to a threadbare
childhood. I had none of this blood in me, the blood of these violent, small
people. And yet—and yet (and yet (and yet))—goddamn was I worried it
was there, somewhere under my skin, the hint of their fuckery , the stink of
those farts. Osmosed from the fumes of the town? How could I be sure I
was free?
So I walked. I walk. I walk and I walk and I walk and feel the air of our
town leave my cells and be replaced by the air and ideas of a different time
and place. The more I breathe this Peninsula air, the more I realize that it
would have been so easy to have elevated my father as a child. This shocks
me, the first time I feel this on the road: the space in my heart for
forgiveness—for giveness! The moment I felt that was like getting hit in the
head with a basketball—a freakish pang,  a dull ache in the skull. I almost
fell into a bush. I was hyperventilating—realizing my heart had expanded in
some immeasurable, beyond-physics way that hearts can expand, and in
that expansion I had new space . There’ s a word in Japanese that sums up
this feeling better than anything in English: yoyū. A word that somehow
means: the excess provided when surrounded by a generous abundance. It
can be applied to hearts, wallets, Sunday afternoons, and more . When did
this happen to me? This extra space, this yoyū, this abundance . Space that
carried with it patience and—g asp—maybe even … love? For a guy who
provided almost nothing? These are the shocks of the walk . The walk
makes me better than I ever imagined I could be (and in this, too, I see how
good you could have been). Better than anyone showed us we could be.
(Far better than who I was earlier on.) Stability , a bit of care, is that all it
takes? The most basic of resources. But these were resource s we didn’ t
have, and guys like my dad never knew . How could my father ’s parents
have felt yoyū when they themselves were pressed against the wall by
economic circum stance, by political flops and failures? No one in their
circles had seen a child elevated in decades. Enough time passes and you
forget how to do that shit.
As I walk the road, more and more clearly , splayed in broad strokes: I see
how our traumas and ignorance were carried forward through generations.
My heart opens up for all these people of our past, our town. An unwitting
meagerness nesting to the core. No notion of yoyū in sight. Somehow , early
on, I decided the only way out of our quagmire was to leave. Heck, believed
we could  leave. I remember now, even at age eleven or twelve, making a
promise to myself that we would get out. I would get myself out and pull
you, too. I’d remove us from the hexed equation entirely—the equation of
the town, the country (for how could a country that let this happen to a town
be trusted?). Building on a coura ge you gave me simply by existing, I began
cultivating an independence to set off far away without a map or guidance,
praying a mind could be reconfigured. Feeling the tininess of my heart as I
hit the road. Feeling constricted by that. Wanting to expand it, to do better .
Wanting to show all of them how it could be.




THE OWNER OF AN INN
I walk and my steps take me over the local train tracks. I see the old sign for
tonight’ s inn hanging off an awning—a classic wooden Japanese building
with a tiled roof. When I slide  open the glass entrance door, the owner
comes scampering down the stairs. Wish I had a video of him to show you.
He’s dressed in pale khakis with a brown leather belt and a tucked-in
button-down blue shirt. Up and down the stairs he goes in stocking feet. He
uses all four limbs. He bends in yogic ways. He’s in his seventie s and blurts
out to me when  I arrive, Well shiiiiiiit,  on the phone I thought you were
Japa- nese.
Everyone else canceled. The perks of pandemics. I’ve got the place to
myself. Built in 1865, or maybe earlier—he’ s vague about the founding
year—and still going. Far enough away from Hong ū to have avoide d the
river floods, far enough away from the ocean to have avoided the tsunamis,
and far enough away from Nagoya to have escaped the bombs. A
Goldilocks position. Nothing to make it a target, no soldiers billeted here
during the war .
Each time I return to the Penins ula I try to add more inns, more stops, try
to touch  it all but know I’ll never be able to. I had never stayed at this inn
before so I didn’ t know what to expect. Called yesterday to confirm and the
owner answered like a mechanic punting an oil change. Said, Hey boy, you
know , I don’t really feel like cooking dinner tomorrow , you mind working
that out on your own?
I laughed and said, Sure. So that’s the plan, later—to “work it out.” I got
cup noodles. He’s got boiling water . We got it covered. It seems great
though, the inn. I’ve been given a high-ceilinged, ten-mat tatami  room on
the second floor , looking out over the valley , and the shared toilet is tiled in
a colorful mid-century , Shōwa-era kinda way , not unlike Howdy’ s.
I smoke  in my wicker -chair -appointed alcove by the window and watch
the express trains blow by. A hundred years ago parts of the inn were moved
to make way for those tracks. They cut right through what used to be an
impressive garden. Some buildi ngs were lifted whole hog and shifted a bit.
Paid for by the rail company . Why they didn’ t shimmy it all a bit more is a
mystery because, holy smokes,  do the trains cut close. Close enough to
swirl the air in your room— CH-CHUN-CH-CHUN-CH-CHUN . Earplugs a
must. Wake-up call five thirty on the dot.
But trains be damned, the loose-limbed owner is grand. Just wants to gab
and gab.
Over drinks at night—me, sparkling water; him, whiskey—we talk. I find
radical honesty about my past to be the quickest way to build intimacy . To
lower a maybe not-so-emotional guy’s defenses. These inn owners are often
adoptees, pulled from outside the immediate family tree to keep the name
going, the line “unbroken.” So I tell the owner how I, too, was adopted right
after birth. Popped out and into the hands of a mother and father who
couldn’ t conceive.
As a trade, he tells me that his beautiful wife is dead. He misses her
tonkatsu  pork chops. He uses her shampoo on his head of thick curls. Still
whispers goodni ght to her as he shuts the inn up for the day. The more he
speaks, the more he drinks. He sidles up, thigh-against-thigh, holds forth at
length. Outside, the rain comes down in sheets. Fills the room with storm
energy. You got a real shit sandwich for weather , he says with a savage grin,
pouring himself another drink.
...
How does it feel to be adopted? It feels like floating off. Like floating off in
your own little bubble apart from everyone else. A bit lonely . A bit distant.
A bit mythic—yes there’ s a mythic quality to adoption. That ever-looming
mystery of origin. But as with the protagonists of many myths, loneliness is
part and parcel. The generous people who took you as a swaddled baby love
you, sure, but there was and always will be a handof f (for whatever reasons,
reasons often unknown). You didn’ t come from us, aren’ t made from us, but
we still love you—your parents  say this to you as a child. Does the child
understand such a thing? No way. That information: a slap. Wait, if I’m not
from you guys, where am I “really ” from? It’s a question so obvious and
elemental that it inhabits the cells of the body more than the mind. It tingles
all over , this fact-induced distance. And it hurts.
And so: You form your bubble, unconsciously , to protect yourself against
that pain, and begin to float off, create your own universe, wondering all the
while where you “ really ” came from.
In contr ast, the history of Japan is filled with great adoptions. Known
adoptions, where provenance is never a mystery . Edo-period samurai
families often adopted young men for the same reasons as these inns: to
keep their family lineage “unbroken.” And not just samurai—politicians,
entertainers, artists, and more. Hideki Yukawa, Nobel-winning physicist,
was so promising that his middle school principal offered to adopt him to
ensure his scholarly success. Later , he was formally adopted into his wife’ s
family—her father had no sons—and changed his name.
One day, a kindly-looking old man with an unusually refined  flair for
fashion sat at the table next to mine in a café. We started chatting. Turned
out, he had been the CEO of Mikimoto, the famous pearl company . Had
married the daughter of the previous CEO, was adopted by the family , took
her name. She died before he did, and the family made him legally
relinquish the name late in life. His business cards—now for no company in
particular—still read “Mikimoto” though. I guess in his heart, that’s who he
felt he had become.
Adoptions like these expand a family like soft flour added to wet dough.
New individuals folded into older , often more powerful households. Change
a name, take that oath, expand that circle, carry that tradition, that space,
that idea forward. An exchange sometimes worth committing a life and
body and name toward.
In these examples, provenance is clear . But for me? Like looking for coins
in a murky pond, as a kid I dreamed of who they might be, those blood
people of mine. Others around me sometimes showed what was possible,
how that connection might feel. I envied your Christmases, Bryan, which
were larger than our four-person affairs. At your house: a mom and dad,
sisters, cats, aunts and uncles, all gathered around the table and tree. A real
tree (ours: 1970 s, plastic, inflammable, stabby), chopped and hauled, pine
needles covering your father ’s hands and then later, in January , the wooden
floors. None of these details were lost on me. The whole notion was idyllic.
Each year you invited me and each year I begged my mother to let me go.
Just to observe. I’d be an adoptee there, too, but one swaddled in a vitality
we just didn’ t have (despite my mom’ s concerted and genuine efforts), our
tiny family, my quiet grandparents. I would have cut off a leg to sit in the
corner of your home, soundless, motionless. To bask in whatever shape
your lives took on. To try to understand a fullness I had neve r known, to
wear it like a suit, even if just for a moment. These are the simple dreams of
the adopted.
But I never did go. (I mean, I’d go later that afternoon, and you’d come
over, too. We’d compare gifts and I always hid half of mine under the couch
because I know you didn’ t get as many as I did.) Instead, I pestered my
poor mother with complicated questions of provenance. (Some  part of me
hoped the story would change if asked enough, as if I could will a new
history into being.) Again and again, she explained how I came from
outside. Often explained in front of that trailer -park boyfriend, who seemed
conflicted—bemused by my confusion but also upset that I didn’t embrace
him unquestioningly as a dad, leaving me riddled with guilt, making these
very topics taboo. I wanted to believe that babies spontaneous ly sprouted
like seedlings in bellies on honeymoons. No no no, my mother explained,
you’ve never been to Hawai’i in my belly . I’d never been embryonic inside
her. Someone else carried me. Someone nameless, faceless, someone
pregnant at thirteen—thirteen!  (The only real detail we had from the
adoption agency .) A reality I couldn’ t imagine and wouldn’ t be able to
empathize with until much later in life. As a kid it was all so abstract—
pregnancy itself, the mechanics,  the ethics. You cannot ask an adopted child
to process all of this. (To make things even more complex: My mother saw
the adoption agency call as coming straight from Jesus himself, often told
me just so. My questions then being not just an affront to the boyfriends,
but also to the son of God himself.) And so wrap the facts of adoption in as
much sweetness as you want, it’s still a slight, one that is confusing, one
that—without more discussion than you might think—the adop ted child is
inspired to push down deep into the gut. Floating off. A bit lonely . A bit
distant. Mythic to the max.
...
Just before bed, the owner of the inn tells me of the workers who used to
stay here. The Peninsula is mostly an unyielding mass of crumpled earth.
It’s from this complex topograph y that the Peninsula divines its history . The
mountainous inaccessibility allowed Buddhism and Shinto to stay mixed
even after nineteenth-century edicts demanded their separation. And it’s
from this mix—preserved even  today—that certain paths and places of
worship were granted UNESCO World Heritage status. The only pilgrimage
routes in the world to have World Heritage designation are the Kii
Peninsula’ s Kumano Kodō and the Camino de Santiago in northern Spain.
If you walk them both, and collect the right stamps, you get a special,
dorky , fabulous pin. (Of course, I have the special pin. I mean, come on.)
The owner tells me that few roads bisect this landmass. It’s easier to
circumscribe, as many of the old routes do, he says. When the government
set about bringing some semblance of modern infrastructure to the
Peninsula, they settled on a coastal highway and railway . The workers built
and blasted in the 1920s and then fleshed out the bypasses after the war.
Even now, the final pieces of the incredible Peninsula bypass are being laid
in the south near Shing ū. For decades this inn served mainly these men, he
says. They stayed for months at a time, a few becoming something like
family .
The owner has seen much, moves in unexpected ways, carries someone
else’s name. His wife is gone. His head smells of flowers. Whiskey on the
breath, he laughs loud and hard and has traveled far from who he once was.

JOHN
If I know anything about anything in these pages here, it’s because a
mentor , a friend twenty years older than me—someone you might have
hated at first (that suspicion, deep in both of us, rightly so, toward elders)
but would have bonded with soon enough—brilliant but secretly crude, kind
and patient, but also a man who takes absolutely no shit, who has crushed
competitors in global business and elevated young artists around the world,
a man named John McBride, a man who has walked Japan for forty-plus
years, speaks with elevated fluency, charms all those who cross his path,
this man, this sort of wizard of walking and history , he showed me how to
walk.
We first met when I was twenty -seven. I had just finished a book called
Art Space Tokyo,  about the Tokyo art world: a beautifully produced survey
with essays and interviews and illustrations with a refined polish that—even
to this day—sho cks me. That the editor and I were capable of producing
such a thing—p ulling all-night ers for weeks and months in my twenty-
square-meter Tokyo apartment that overlooked a palm tree and a parking
lot, with a budget of nearly nil—is a testament to youthful tenacity and
hubris. John was involved with the art world but not the book, and we had
never met. A mutual friend introduced us. We sat down for breakfast and
didn’ t stand up until five P.M. My writing of that book unlocked a
connection. (Throughout life I’d marvel again and again at the power of
writing—and writing books, especially—and how all my most treasured
friendships were grounded, somehow , in published words.) Over the many
intervening years, his knowledg e and generosity has elevated me like he
elevates everyone. This elevation I call “the John Ef fect.”
I first spotted the John Effect on a train to Kōyasan. Our carriage was
empty . We were heading to climb the Chōishi-Michi: an old mountain route
leading up from Kudoyama to Kōyasan’ s Daimon gate—our first walk on
the Peninsula. A trail with stone markers (the choishi ) every 109.09 meters.
A few stops in, an old guy hopped on. He sat near us and leaned over and
said something to John, perha ps in what he assumed to be our mother
tongue. I was sitting opposite and the train was clacking and screeching
away . I couldn’ t make out much, really , so I was only able to witness  the
transformation induced by the John Effect from afar. John spoke. The man’ s
facial muscles softened and softened more. John continued. The man’ s
shoulders rose, his smile grew , he became ebullient and anima ted. By the
time we got of f, I thought that he might stand and salute.
The second time was just a few minutes later. The station of our
disembarkation was barely more than a shack. The middle-aged attendant—
uniformed with a crisp cap—came out and John began asking questions.
Now I could hear: simple questions about the station, then the general
locale, then the old route itself,  the twelve-hundred-year -old path we were
bound for up the mountain. With each expansion of scope, the attendant
leaned in closer  and closer still. A local wandering past, wear ing a baker
boy, came over, intrigued, listened, leaned in. John’ s questions became
more technical, more historical, academic. Revealing, slowly , his
encyclopedic interests. Did so-and-so emperor really  stop by this rock, four
hundred meters up there? Did this daimyo  pray for years by this tree or that
tree? It was pure gibberish to me but mana to these folks.
You must understand: The questions were delivered not just with total
fluency , but also an edge of the imperial. That is: John raised the station of
all he spoke with in the way he spoke. His language was inflected with forty
years of tea ceremony , forty years of running businesses and negotiating tax
deals and wiggling out of parking tickets. You can do this in Japanese:
Choose to modify the conjugat ion of verbs, choose upper -register words,
make choices sometimes overt  and other times sneaky , but choices that
convey a deep respect. The power of these choices commingli ng with his
deep historical knowledge was a wild one-two blow to all who crossed our
path. Caught so off guard, they’ d flip over the swing set of disbe lief. Vibing
out on the ride John took them on through time and language,  blissed and
delighted, total converts, absolute allies.
I’d go on to observe this a hundred more times. My own language
changed—the very shape of my brain itself felt like it changed—bearing
witness to this thing, this undeniable effect. Bryan, you and I grew up with
nothing like this in our periphery . The core of the John Effect is deceptively
simple. An archetype of speech and being that we lacked: respect mixed
with a fervent curiosity colored by a deep and profound  emotional
intelligence. A state made possible by boundless yoyū. Just believe,  John
seemed to say through word and action. Believe that through the power of
respect you can convert someo ne to your side. John also seems  to take
nothing persona lly (though he keeps a secret ledger , of course). Back home,
I don’t think we ever saw someone rise above personal affront. All the
fights in our town, superficial fights. One-dimensional chess. John showed
me how to operate on another plane, to not play the game at all. We once
got in a countr yside cab whose driver seemed profoundly against our
patronage. Tried to wave us away , crossed his arms, spat some balderdash,
squinted with disgust. Had I been alone I probably would have kicked his
door and given him the finger . But, no. In a blast of benign elegance that
would have made the Dalai Lama swoon, John ignored all that and elevated
the poor bastard with beautiful  language. By the end of the ride he had
given John his card and of fered us the fare gratis .
I still walk with John. I’ll never turn down an offer from him to walk
together . Though more and more, I walk alone. As much as I learn from
John, I can only “see” the road when I’m alone. When walking with
someone, the voices in my head  are quieted and I miss the chance to turn
inward, which is a primary quali ty and primary purpose of a solo walk. That
inward turn. A little mental pirouette that’s tough to pull off in the normal
day-to-day . Walking with John feels like attending a class. The best kind of
class with the best kind of teacher. Walking alone feels like putting into
practice all that John has taught me. So: different acts entirely . I can only
walk alone having learned how to walk, how to look at the world with
abundant genero sity. And even now, as I make my way down the Peninsula,
John tracks my GPS coordinates , sees where I am. Each day he sends me a
little note with the day’s history . Little facts about what’ s coming up. I have
ten years of these notes. I call them the “Book of John.”
I can write all this down and you still won’ t understand. Had we
discovered a “Book of John” when we were kids, would it have changed
things? Probabl y not. The “Book of John” is an extension of the John
Effect, and the John Effect is something that will never make complete
sense in words. You may get the gist, but it’s only by witnessing it, again
and again, that you believe it. You really believe it’s as simple as: kindness,
curiosity , generosity . Yoyū. Just a bit of goddamned yoy ū.
IPPON-URA
And so I walk these historic roads, but also many just-of f roads . Roads I’ve
nicknamed “ippon-uras ”—roads behind, roads less traveled, roads a degree
beyond. Some pieces of the official routes—parts of the true Ise-ji, Ise
Kaid ō, Ōhechi, and others—can be stultifying, jammed with trucks, having
been turned into highway bypasses, stripped and rebuilt and stripped again.
I’m not looking for pure walking romance, but those throughways
sometimes tax your sanity . So my love for an ippon-ura often borders on
irrational. I’ll waddle through  a newly tilled field, black  earth like
quicksand, to get to one. They are, in many instances, the preferable route.
The joy of the ippon-ura lies in bearing witness to lives being lived. This,
a core tenet of a good walk: real-time observation of unfiltered life. Without
the din and trundle of big-roa d engines, you hear baths being drawn,
children crying,  a television relaying the day’s news. You poke your head
into a barbershop and catch a potbelly flanked by murderous implements,
asleep in the chair .
Walk these smal l back roads, do so for kilometer after kilometer , day after
day, look closely and closer still, and you might pick up on the people and
patterns of a general area. I wouldn’ t go so far as to say you’ll “know” or
“understand” it, but I would say that walking—and walking slowly and
deliberately , alone—is probably the first step to familiarizing yourself with
a place.
...
Today , Bryan, I found a circuitous ippon-ura that made the whole damn day
—a few klicks of elevated footp ath between glistening rice paddies around
a strange and sudden hummock . A piece of land you could circle in ten
minutes, bristlin g with bamboo and cedars, no shrines, no homes, just earth
left as it was— unleveled, unused, surrounded by fields. An “island” that,
had we grown up here, you and I would have most certainly made claim
upon—carved out secret hiding spots and called on each other to congregate
at dusk. Together , we’d have held unorthodox sermons, passed suspect
knowledge back  and forth, dissolute wisdoms. We’d have proffered answers
to all questions tobacco- and firearm-related, offered illicit trades,
administered solemn blood oaths, snickered at stolen pornographic
photographs.
Gratitude for these memories knocked loose by the road. By an emptying
countryside. Each walking day, a series of ecstatic moments, sad moments,
lost moments. My mind bouncing between the crumbling asphalt of our
town and the newly poured concrete of this peninsula. Even as the
Peninsula’ s population disappears, the infrastructure is maintained.
The “Book of John” chimes in with a poem about walking these roads,
from an 1 169 anthology of poetry by abdicated emperor Go-Shirakawa:
Which r oad to Kumano is shorter
The Ki-ji r oad or the Ise-ji r oad
If it is a pilgrimage full of compassion
Then neither r oad is far
I cut from an ippon-ura back onto the main Ise Kaid ō path and pass a
knee-high stone  marker . At first glance, just a rock. But a rock with
deliberate shape. A deliberately shaped rock with chiseled directions. The
faint remnants of weather -smoothed logographs, Chinese characters. A
centuries-old signpost for Ise Grand Shrine. The kinds of markers that
probably belong  in museums but here are left by the roadside where they’ve
always been. They reveal that once, long ago, others also wondered which
way was correct, which path might be the better road.
INVITATIONS
Death is all over the Peninsula. There’ s rarely a walking day without its
visible imprint. This was a place of great pilgrimage walking for over a
thousand years. Its inaccessibility made it all the more mysterious, more
dangerous, more spiritual. (Danger and spirituality seem to be in constant
conversation with each other .) A blithe hunk of earth called Kii on which
you had to work to gain entry .
The day’s “Book of John” arrives with a language and history lesson:
Inside of Kii, in the center of the Peninsula, is an area called Kumano. This
is where  the Kumano Kodō gets its name. In Chinese characters it is written
as 
 . The original character for kuma  (
) is 
—nook, corner , recess.
A recessed space. No (
)—undeveloped or virgin, the wilds. The recessed
wilds.
John writes that a dude named Alan Grapard describes the area as a
“natural mandala.” Says it’s a geographic area endowed with “all the
qualities of metaphysical space.” Says a mandala is a spiritual map
symbolizing the Buddhist world, imprinted onto a real place.
Although I’m walking roads, I’m also walking this map representing
things beyond what we can see. A layering deeper and weirder than we ever
dreamed.
It’s easy to imagine how death finds a home here. Millions of walkers
over a thousand years. Tough terrain. Poisonous snakes. Angry boars. Bears
—those, too. Sometimes walks beside cliffs sheer enough to induce
horripilation—views of a death so grim that your hair stands on end.
The ashes of so-called fallen pilgrims lie near Owase, a graveyard neatly
carved into the mountainside, their markers weathered flat and covered in
moss. Stained cliffs mark the high-water lines of past tsunamis near
Kushimoto, showing precisely how high the water had gotten (so high, so
much higher than you imagine) after tectonic plates deep below swayed a
few cosmic inches, sent ripples the size of aircraft carriers across the ocean.
A stone record at Nagashima Shrine reports the precise number of people
washed away hundreds of years  ago, and then a hundred years before that,
too.
On the general matter of death, I’m sad to report that my thirtie th year on
this planet was truly bonkers. A vortex of familial expirations. My
grandfather passed—the long-r etired factory man—and then two months
later, my father , that far-off guy whose birthday I had never memorized.
And four month s after that, my grandmother . The family was small to begin
with, and then they all dropped, the ones closest on the tree, near
simultaneously . Half a year , just like that—a death chord.
By chan ce, months before those funerals began was when John invited me
to the Peninsula . Not only had I never been, I had never even heard its
name: Kii. Wha t a word. A bit sneaky , that extra “i.” An English speaker
tends to chop it off, staccato the word to death, but in Japanese the double
“i” persists, if only subtly . The slightest elongation, a micro-extension
indicating fluen cy and understanding. Details like this make me shudder ,
the world so damn particular .
That Kii invitation was for me to spend a few days around Kōyasan, the
1,200-year -old Shingon Buddhist temple area smack just north of the center
of the Peninsula. Founded by the brilliant Buddhist scholar posthumously
named Kōbō Daishi, who in gumonji-h ō meditation (a meditation where
you recite a mantra a million times) adopted the name Kūkai: air and sea.
This man of air and sea willed into being this place of seclud ed rock and
wood. Secured the funds from cinnabar (mercury sulfide) deposits on the
central Peninsula to hire the workers to haul the materials, to build the
temples in a time when doing so must have felt as fantastical as living on
Mars does today .
Disembarking from the cable car felt like stepping into cradling  hands of
stone. Mountains surround the inner plateau that is Kōyasan proper. The
first organ to freak out was my lungs. This air, they screamed, this cool air
in July , this air of life.
And then my eyes. Because—the fullness. Geez, did it ever astound—
those trees! Those centuries-old  cedars with gnarly bark. So thick you’d
need a starting lineup of footballers holding hands to hug them fully.
Reaching ever skyward, those graceful cedars formed a thick canopy up
above, flanking the central path through the graveyard, the kilometers-long
graveyard at the heart of it all. A graveyard known as Okuno in, surfaced
with paving stones worn smooth by the feet of millions, home not only to
the ashes of more than 200,000 people, of feudal lords and warring-states
daimyo, but also to moss lush enough to lie down on naked and wilt in
reverence. Our town was once tobacco and blueberry fields, ground infused
with farming and industrial poisons, uncommonly high rates of dementia,
violent impulses. Who knows what lurks in our blood? But staying in those
temples, surroun ded by sumptuous life, I felt my body change in the way
that pure nature changes bodie s—the fresh inputs of mountain water and
mountain vegetables flushing out the garbage I had unwittingly brought
forward. I felt lighter . I smelled different; an earthy sourness. Above, a clear
blue sky. The spaces between the leaves and needles of the canopy
coruscated like daytime stars. Suddenly , birdsong was all around. A series
of aston ishments. These were feelings I’d carry through those funerals and
further still. I didn’ t think much, but felt it all. In time I’d come to
understand: Yep, I get why holy man Kōbō Daishi,  ol’ Kūkai, picked this
spot.
...
When I was nineteen, moving to Japan may have felt temporary , was a
somewhat arbitr ary choice, but over time it has become an emigration, not
an expatriation. Today , I feel nothing like an “expat,” that word of extreme
privilege applie d to Westerners moving east, a word charged with
connotations of asymmetric power , of non-permanence, of elevation above
and immunity from local laws and customs, of your “home” being better , a
place to which you’d obviously  return. For me, Japan was the place of
promise and opportunity built atop sensible legislation and social safety
nets and functional governance. A shot across the bow of our narratives
spun back across the ocean, the long-since-abased notions of freedom. How
can you say that a country “loves” you without providing health care? When
the schools are criminally underfunded? It took me a while  to see this
clearly , though. But the more I looked, the more my norms were
reconfigured, the clearer it became: Here was a place where people were
taken care of by the greater whole. I realize now what luck it was—what
great privilege it was—to have access to this new country through a fluke, a
quirk of university pricing, a golden cartridge’ s impression, and my ability
to qualify for an Artist Visa (one renewed for nearly fifteen years after
university befor e converting to a permanent resident). I don’t take for
granted my being here for one second. I owe my life to this country .
Soon again after those funerals  of my thirtieth year, another invitation
from John. The Peninsula wouldn’t let go. Come, he said, let’s do the
central walk of Kii, the recently UNESCO World Heritage-designated
Kumano Kodō. Had never heard that name either. Although by this point I
had lived in Japan for over a decade, I was still wholly ignorant of so much.
Didn’ t know the old roads, didn’ t know Nakahechi from Kohec hi from Ise-
ji from my boots. But I learn ed. Suddenly , the months and years were
structured aroun d walks, many solo, up and down this peninsula , these very
mountains, this very coast.
I had the language skills to communicate with everyone I passed, to hear
their stories. I didn’t yet know what I’d do with those stories. Over time, my
solo walks became tools, platforms for thinking, for drawing the wider
world in closer and making the inner world visible. Death, also, was made
palpable. That far-off triplet of death I had rushed through (and I had rushed
through it, much like I had rushed through other deaths in the past)—I
began working it over on the road.
The Peninsula and death, stuck together in my mind. Laye rs of the
Peninsula itself,  too, now dying  before my eyes. Much of its lumber and
fishing industrie s have moved to China. The countryside of Japan is aging
out of existence. There are few children to be seen. Peninsula villages wink
out in real time.  Shops are shuttered, battered by storms, broken windows
left broken. Cars rust in ditches . The newest buildings you see are freshly
poured concrete tubes looking like Tadao Andō architectural installations.
But they’re just government-funded tsunami escape towers.
I think of the people who died making this place habitable.  Moiling,
chopping through the verdant forest—thick, lush, unyielding—
homesteading, carving rice plots out of mountainsides, buildi ng all those
drystone walls to keep out the boar and deer. Now dead, those people. I pass
them each day on the walk. Ashes in cemeteries they themselves hacked
into rock.

THINGS BECOME OTHER THINGS
Boy, you … drink?
He was seventy . Spoke haltingly like he may have suffered a stroke,
though drove confidently down the dark mountainside roads. He was taking
me back to his minshuku  bed-and-breakf ast after a wet thirty-kilometer day
and a pit stop at the local public bath. Twenty minutes after meeting, we
were soaking together in a giant tub with farmers and construction workers.
Now the two of us were pleasan tly cooked, radiating heat in the cab of his
little truck. Dinner was on his mind, and so: Boy , you … drink?
Not really , I say .
Oh. Damn, well, that’ s … okay . Got … a lotta beer .
And then after a few seconds: Wait, you … a … a beer man?
Not really , sometimes, I mean, I used to drink tons.
Just then, a deer ran across the road; Run run, don’t you get hit! I say to
the darkness, laughing.
You got … good eyes! he says. Most folk … today … can’t spot no deer
at … night. So you … a sake drinker , then?
I was getting embarrassed. Considered breaking sobriety to simplify
things, but eventually say , No, sir , no sake either .
Then, what … you … want with dinner?
Maybe some, I dunno, cold barley tea?
And, you’ll go … cut that with shōchū?
Nope. Just boring barley tea. Or even better , water .
Oh, well … we got good … water .
I think I broke his heart. I think he wanted a drinking buddy .
His wife cooked up enough food for four people. I know this because she
says: I cooked for four. I am the only one staying the night, the only one
eating. She offers me a spread of some twenty pieces of tempura. A hot pot
that could feed a sumo troupe. Tofu. Pickles. Half a kilo of rice. They keep
chanting, Get fat! Get fat! I laugh as I shovel food into my mouth,
imagining them as cannibals. In reality they are old, retired, bored.
A giant cockroach flies into the room. I shriek. The wife’ s hand snaps out,
crushing it with her palm like a leaf.
The water from their well is—I must say—superb.
...
They ask me if I want a Western or Japanese breakfast. Most inns don’t
offer a choice, most are Japanes e-style only. So when I get the chance, I go
Western, if only to shake things up. Big mistake. She bakes me five loaves
of bread. Can’ t believe I don’t eat them all. The husband keeps gesturing for
me to rip them apart and shove them down my gullet.
They stand and watch as I carbo-load. They are unusually touch y, squeeze
my arms , check my body mass index. They use a translucent garbage bag to
wrap up most of the bread. I tie it to my pack like a hobo.
Just then, a woman who looked in her mid-thirties opens the front door.
Strolls in as if she had been waiting for me to finish.
Oh, hey , this is our daughter , the wife says.
Uh, hello, I say, nice to meet you. Your parents are trying to murder me
with bread.
She laughs. We chat for a bit, but I have to get walking. The distance
loomed large—about twenty-five kilometers with significant elevation to
the next inn.
As the husband drove me down off the mountain, back to the Ise-ji path,
he broke our silence by saying, She ain’ t … our daughter .
I am entranced by something out the window: Beyond the fields, past a
dirt road, in the forest something burned.
Before I can register what he said, he continues with more fluency: She
just appeared seven years back. Wanderin’  the country , needin’  a job,
somehow … found us. Not a daughter but like a daughter . Time passes, life
moves, and that’ s what happens: Things become … other things.
WHA T TO BELIEVE
It was a day of rain and becau se of that, soft textures. The world’ s edges
were tempered behind a fine mist that hung in the air. It was a day
resplendent with more stone markers, old as can be, glistening, pointing in
the direc tion of Ise Grand Shrine, a sprawling compound containing two
primary shrines and 123 auxilla ry shrines and occupying some twenty-two
square kilometers. A place largely dedicated to sun and universe goddess
Amaterasu, chief Shinto deity . That’ s what most walkers on this road would
have been aiming for. Stone markers here for hundreds of years. A hundred
years from now , might be all that’ s left.
Bryan, I realize all along I’ve been writing “temple” and “shrine” to you
and maybe the difference isn’t obvious. It wasn’ t to me for the first ten
years I lived here. But the distinction is simple: Shrines are Shinto, and
temples are Buddhist. People often use the words interchangeably , but
Shinto and Buddhism share no common source.
Shinto is Japan’ s native “religio n.” A set of animistic beliefs that formed
somewhat organically through the veneration of many gods—so-called
kami . Kami that manifest through rocks (“This one looks like a vagin a—it’ s
now a fertility kami!”) and gnarled roots and mountains and anything else
impressive and beautiful found in nature. You know the director and
animator Hayao Miyazaki? Spirited Away? That’ s just cribbing Shinto
through and through. That collection of peculiar kami, odd kami, bathing
kami. That kind of playfulness—that’ s all over Shinto.
Buddhism, on the other hand, came from abroad, didn’ t arrive in Japan
until the sixth century—a thousand years after Buddhism was founded.
Made its way from India via trade routes, came over on boats to Japan.
Something clicked. Shinto and Buddhism became syncretic; that is, they
peacefully coha bitated in the mind of Japan. Not just peacefully , but in
mutually elevating ways. The kami of Shinto and the gods of Buddhism
mixed without detracting from either . The “Book of John” tells me that the
Sun Goddess of Japan—the most important deity—b ecame the
manifestation of the Dainichi Nyorai Buddha, the Cosmic Buddha. In death,
the Shōgun Tokugawa Ieyasu was deified. He ended one hundred years of
civil war. Brought about the Edo period, an era of great peace and
prosperity . He became Tosho Daigongen, and was considered to be the
manifestation of the Yakushi Nyorai, the Medicine Buddha and great healer
of the nation.
Because of this tranquil mingling, for much of the last fifteen hundred
years, you’d find shrines on the grounds of temples, and temples on the
grounds of shrines. This lasted  until 1868, when the Meiji government
passed the shinbutsu bunri  law, mandating the severing of the two. This was
the start of a complicated era: extreme nationalistic impulses, the winding-
up of the war machine, the government using Shinto as “homegrown proof”
of the elevation of the Japanese  above others in the region. I guess that in
the end, even the most beauti ful, well-intentioned tool can be used to
terrible ends.
But before the split, pilgrims made their way to both shrine and temple
without discrimination.
In ancie nt times, most big walks were pilgrimage walks. You couldn’ t
move freely through the country without a reason, an official stamp in your
passport. There were checkpoints everywhere—feudal domains protecting
themselves from neighboring invasion (civil war being the primary war of
Japan throughout its history). A pilgrimage was the easiest way to get
permission to travel. Who could  deny the need for spiritual aid? And why
travel? Because it was fun. Sure, you were going to the gods and kami to
ask for help, but also the road was a carnival, travelers and food and cheeky
carousing aplenty . Very little tight-lipped stoicism. Chaucer in the East.
“Now is the time to visit all the celebrated places in the count ry and fill
our heads with what we have seen, so that when we become old and bald,
we shall have something to talk about over our teacups,” so begins Thomas
Satchell’ s transla tion of one of the most famous literary accounts of walking
in Japan— Shank’ s Mare. A book from  the early nineteenth century . It
continues: “Let us join this dissipated Yajirobei and his hanger -on Kitahachi
with their money  kept warm in the loincloths around their navel s; with their
light footgear and their many layers of ointment, which will keep their feet
from getting sore for thousands of miles; and their cotton robes dappled like
the flesh of a clam. Let us go with them through foot-worn Yamato,
welcomed by the divine wind that blows from the Grand Shrine  of Ise, with
the flowers of the capital and the plum blossoms of Naniwa at the end of
our journey .”
But, of course, not all walkers were as free-flowing as “Yaji” and “Kita,”
and most villages didn’ t have enough money to send everyone. So pilgrims
were chosen by local lottery . Lucky schmucks, carrying the purse of their
village warm in the loincloths around their navels, adopted by all.
Carry us forward in spirit, said the villagefolk. Take the idea of us to those
shrines. Let the gods know that we, too, got problems worthy of their
attention. Bring back some good stories, stories for us to talk about over
these old, chipped teacups of ours.
EVERYONE
Of those I pass, most everyone is old, bent over, of an era soon gone. They
yell to me, Where ya from, and say stuff like, Wow, these times, tough
bugger . They tend their little fields as they’ve done probably for some fifty
years and will continue to do until their children—of f in Osaka or Nagoya,
big cities, places with futures, industries, factories, ways to make money—
finally send them to some assisted-living facility to finish out their days.
I meet an elderl y logger who is the last of his kind. A wizened fisherman
who doesn’t know how much longer he’ll be able to fish. Another younger
guy who tells me he catches dolphins, and I’m knocked back on my heels
so far all I can do is laugh. (Dolphins, Bryan, dolphins.) Back home,
walking Main Street, who woul d be left for us to meet? Men and women
who once worked jobs that no longer exist? Once working lines at the
airplane-engine factory or assembling firearms? Or maybe even a retired
insurance guy? Since that’s what everyone in the city over the river was
doing—once the insurance capital of the world, now not so much. That, too,
commodified, moved south for tax breaks, without anything real to take its
place. Somethin g else filled the void—drugs, poverty . But here, no drugs,
no poverty like we knew . It’s a mystery I try to understand through these
walks, these chats. But I’m beginning to think the answer is pretty simple:
People care, and are cared for, on a level of abstraction absent from our
town.
The “Book of John” tells me that on today’ s walk many of the natural
features along the routes are considered to be deities. He means the
mountains but I take it to mean the people. Each a tiny god.


So I stop and chat. I’ll stop and chat with most anyone. I like their faces,
their weathered hands, hands dappled like the flesh of clams. They wear
flower -print smocks and comically large hats. They drive miniature
backhoes plowing miniature fields. They once built miniature stone walls
circumscribing their properties. Those walls now crumbling on abandoned
plots. One by one, they wave and I wave back.


ISE
Every twenty years the shrines of Ise are rebuilt. Specialist craftsmen—
carpenters called miyadaiku —descend upon the grounds and get to work.
They carry in hand their delightful sumitsubo —ink pots with strings to be
slapped against boards marking cut-lines. Three generations work in
parallel to pass down the knowledge of joinery and proportion . For some
thirteen hundred years they’ve  been doing this with ticktock regularity:
rebuilding.
These are well-known facts, the facts of Ise. Well-known and oft-cited
facts that delight visitors. But—it is impress ive, the whole fandango, worth
reciting again and again, worth marveling at the collective tenacity on
display . Consider: The Colosseum of Rome was built once, built of
materials to last the ages. To see it today is to see what was. But even now,
we don’t quite know how they made their concrete. Knowledge lost. Here,
at Ise, the wooden structures feel like flames, constructed from a living
knowledge. A knowledge havin g been carried so very far, with so very
much care.
The day’s small chapter of the “Book of John” arrives at five A.M., before I
set of f:
Big day—such an important place in Shinto mythology! An interesting
example of Ise pilgrimage in the Middle Ages is the case of the wealthy
Fujiwara Saneshige from Kita- Ise. His diary was only discovered in
1951 inside a statue of Buddha in Yokkaichi City, where your walk
began a week ago. By 1241 he had visited Ise more than thirty times.
Saneshige donated rice to Ise every New Year. He paid for Buddhist
sutras to be read at the shrine. (An example of its long-standing
syncretic nature with Buddhism .) It is interesting to note that Saneshige
mostly prayed at sub-shrines, not at the main shrines. Like many others
at the time, he was more interested in local deities.
The grounds are littered with these smaller shrines, these “local deities.”
Each shrine has two plots—plots situated side by side. Every twenty years
the shrine’ s positions alternate, but in the years of the rebuild, the old and
new stand next to each other . The fresh hinoki  cedar of the new shrine
glows in the sun as if lit from within, suffused with a purity that makes it
easy to understa nd why it’s favored for Shinto ceremonies. The old shrine,
its hinok i weather -beaten, seem s painted with the wisdom and wishes and
hopes of a million million pilgrims. To see this old and new side by side is
to see time on a cozy scale. The priests keep them like this for a month or
two as the deity moves from one to the other . But soon, the old is
dismantled, the wood recycled.  The adjacent plot left empty until twenty
more years pass.
All the while, children cut around and through the grounds on the way to
school, run past the great shrines of Ise as if they were any old building in
any old place.
I watch the kids and think of you. Us meeting in first grade. I remember
the room, its shape (an almost perfect square), the warm morning light, the
orientation of desks, but not the name of the teacher . Or any other students.
I remember a math test, and doing well. Who else was in that room with us,
I couldn’ t say. But you were there and we quickly fused as children do,
intuitively , without much thought, almost chemically , and I remember
feeling that yes, yes, this kid. You. It’s strange how we feel these things,
these obvious truths, so young, with so little experience.
You were four months older than me and always a bit bigger . But we had
the same dirty-blond hair and well-defined cheekbones and sharp jaws and
body shapes that stayed thin and athletic—no matter how much garbage we
swallowed—as we grew . Everyo ne who met us assumed we were brothers,
which—I don’t know if it deligh ted you, but it delighted me to no end, gave
me so much happiness—inspired us, I imagine, to do the same.
It’s been  years since the last Ise rebuild, and so only one shrine stands.
Today , caramelized by rain and wind and baked by the sun, it no longer
glows. It has the patina of time exposed, feels ready to sink into the
surrounding forest. I do a quick calculation in my head. The shrine probably
looked somethin g like this when  we met. Maybe a little more worn, but not
dissimilar . We felt a flame in that classroom. Moved on it quickly, figured
out our homes were close. Oh, shit, just there? Just there. Realizing how if
we took roads the route was stupidly long and annoying, but if you cut
down and up the ravine, just a minute. Easy . In this way we shared our first
secret, constructed a path all our own, built a space to nurture that energy of
friendship. In this moment we were the same.
Two healthy young boys with healthy minds, capable of so much. Our
paths ran paralle l for so long, until they didn’ t. But as we now know , you
can start at the same place, under shared circumstance, and in the end it
means nothing.
The “Book of John” urges me to visit the shrines at twilight. Matsuo
Bash ō, the famed haiku poet, wrote about visiting Ise in his 1684 travel
journal Nozarashi Kiko —“The Records of a Weather -Exposed Skeleton.”
John translates:
I went down to Ise where I spent 10 days with a friend named Fubaku. I
visited the outer shrine of Ise one evening just before dark. The first
gate of the shrine was standing in the shadow , and the lights were
glimmering in the background. As I stood there, lending my ears to the
roar of pine trees upon distant mountains, I felt moved deep in the
bottom of my heart.
Bash ō was so moved, he did the thing he always did, the thing that made
Bash ō Bashō, the thing that carried his name up through the ages: He
composed a haiku.
In the utter darkness
Of a moonless night
A powerful wind embraces
I do just that, walk the shrine’ s grounds at twilight. They’re vast. It feels
at times like you’re in a national park. It’s fantastical to think of these
cedars—this entire place, Ise—existing as we cut through backyards. If you
had put us on a plane and flown us over, we could have seen it. (Imagine
that.) But in the moment neither we nor anyone around us could have
managed such a thing—financially , intellectually , emotionally . Ise, a place
once welcoming the arrival of famed poets and retired emperors, today
mostly welcoming everyday pilgrims: balding men in boxy suits, women
with dyed brown hair in drab office clothing, younger women in baggy
jeans with awkward boyfriends by their side, old women with blue-tinted
hair in wheelchairs, tightly curled punch-permed local gangsters in
sunglasses clutc hing their leather man-purses. All of them standing before
the shrine.
Outside the shrine, not inside the building. Very important. Inside is for
the many kami. Even Bash ō was kept out: “The keeper of the inner shrine
prevented me from entering the holy seat of the kami because my
appearance was like a Buddhist priest. I am indeed dressed like a priest, but
priest I am not, for the dust of the world still clings to me.” I feel the dust of
our town every day, on every inch of my body . So, like Bash ō, I stick to the
paths of the grounds on my twilight walk. Regardless, most Shinto prayers
happen outside. Unlike, say, a Catholic church, where the prayers happen
with a roof over your head, Shinto shrines extend by implication into the
surrounding nature. The environ s—trees, waterfalls, rocks—as important as
the form al shrines themselves. I walk and in directions all around me I hear
those everyday pilgrims clang coins into the wooden donation boxes on the
steps of shrines.  They bow and clap. The procedure is quick—n o drawn-out
litany of yearnings and anguish are unfurled as you might kneeling in a
church pew. A prayer at a Shinto shrine is more “hello” than “help.” The
help being implied through greeting, from simply letting the kami know
you’re here, putting your very existence on the radar of these local deities.
Inside the shrines themselves—through windows and doorways —you catch
glimpses of priests in crisp white robes as they shuffle about in the
background, carry branches, objects. Deep within, the shrines hold ancient
metal mirrors covering nagi bayberry leaves, small meals of rice for those
unknowable, unseeable kami.
Acts at a shrine are abstract acts of purification. Attempts to remove stains
from lives and minds, the past and the future. Shinto is purity , is life, is
birth; a spark of belief cultivated for so many thousand years. Hello.
...
I spend the night at an old inn called Asakitchi near the shrines. It was
saved from bombing, just barely . A few kilometers north, the inns up there
in the old brothel district were bombed. They had housed Japanese troops
during the war. But my inn didn’t, for whatever reasons. And so was saved.
The tatami-mat room I sleep in is a hundred and fifty years old, the owners
several generations deep.
When did Ise begin? I ask John  and he answers: “It’s all myth. Some say
fourth century . Some say fifth century . The Nihon Shoki—‘The Chronicles
of Japan,’  an eighth-century book—says Ise began two thousand years
back.” This is how things start: fuzzy , and then not. At some point Ise had
no history , was built for the first time. You and I had no real gods, no
Christian god we truly believed in, no alternatives offered up, just our blaze
of friendship—a  kami of our own making. In that, we believed hard. Down
and up the ravine, we carried the flame for years, trying— and failing,
always failing, operating without blueprints, not knowing the quagmires
within which we were stuck—to build something in our lives that had never
before been built.


LANGUAGE
The farther down the Peninsula, the deeper the accents. There is great
delight in measuring distance through twang, through how loose a tongue
feels in the mouth.
Do Japanese people say “ain’ t”? They do to my ears. Language grounds
abstraction, impulse, conceit. It’s the form we give to such shapeless things,
to the cascading tides of our mind. So while there might not be an explicit
“ain’ t” in Japanese itself, within the Kii Peninsula there is the vibe of
“ain’ t” and the intention of “ain’ t” and the chemical swirl of “ain’ t” in how
the folks intone, and I try to bring that to these pages.
...
When I arrived in Japan, to live in Tokyo, I knew but the faintest basics—
about both the country and the language. I chose Japan mainly because it
seemed so opposite, so far from  where we came from. Its language—not
just the sounds but the feelings, the impulses contained within those sounds
—shared no fundamental etymological history with English. For example:
Subjects and verbs were flipped. This seemed good. Important. I wanted to
flip it all, all the bits of my life—this, the start of rewiring my brain. That
linguistic gap carried a potentia l for self-renewal. Move your lips like so
and a new self could be built from a fresh set of blocks. This was the
promise of the language. (The promise of all language.) I felt this intuitively
stumbling throu gh those first Japanese classes. Blocks to be learned on my
own terms, held close until they became part of the muscles of my face and
—I hoped—the way I stood, walked, slept, lived.
The emotional intensity and density of that first year was so extreme that I
know exactly where I learned specific phrases or grammatical  rules. Like
walking the streets of Ochanom izu at nineteen—not imagining  I’d be here
three years later, never mind twenty-three—looking for a backp ack, asking
a fellow  student how to conjug ate verbs to mean “I want.” There were so
many banal things to want back  then, and they all seemed wholly outside
my grasp.
The homestay family I had been assigned that first year—a husband, wife,
son, and part-time-working Kore an boy also on a student visa—would have
fit in perfectly with our town, Bryan. The trash-jumbled kitchen.  Meals with
the TV blaring. The lopsided marriage. But all with an othered asymmetry .
Here, the trash was styrofoam containers of fermented soybea ns, the wife
had all the powe r, controlled the purse, called the shots. They ran a noodle
restaurant. She bossed her husband around, a guy who never learned my
name in the nine months I lived there. Hey! she’d yell. BEER! NOW!  To
which he’d sheepishly comply . He came home one day with a pate as
smooth as a peeled egg. Apparently he had been using a toupee. Hage!
Hage!  Baldy! Baldy! They laughed and laughed at him. New word. I
learned a surprising phrase when out for crab dinner with the family’ s
grandparents (“crab” itself, learned in the back seat of their car— kani). The
grandfather , a war vet, stroked my leg and laughed and relayed to me some
war story involving an unknown phrase. I looked it up on my pocket
electronic dictionary: seiby ō, sexually transmitted disease. Later , I was
forced to learn the word for masturbation (onani —Japanese has always
been an unrepentant borrower of words from English and elsewh ere, though
somehow they feel utterly changed, remade, reflected through the
language’ s subse t of sounds) when the eleven-year -old son kept doing it all
over the house. Once under the table, next to me in the living  room as I
typed out emails. That was it. I came home from school the next day and
gave him advice  in my then-pid gin Japanese about the best places to jerk
off. I hope it wasn’t too traumatic a conversation, but fear I may have
forever ruined self-pleasuring. The mysterious Korean boy came to my
room each night, kneeling in my doorway , and from that I learne d the words
of salvation and church and how badly he ached for the safety of my soul.
He slept in a closet.
It was almost too much, too weird. To travel from where we were and
then to land in this home. There was something comforting about it,
certainly , some kind of familiar  salty-earth purity to it, but hearing of my
classmates’  families—young couples who lived in “tower mansions” (what
high-rises were called—new word) and took their homestay students on
adventures to national parks (more new words, learned in the lobby of my
university on a Monday morning)—I once again felt so much of our
scarcity . The free-standing post-war wooden home I was in was like living
in a cardboard box that had been kicked down a frozen canyon. It had no
insulation. Crowded between other buildings, it hadn’ t been touched by
sunlight in decades. It was there that I learned the word for sleeping bag
(nebukur o) and donned a full-body snows uit when I went to bed. I learne d
all the words for every permutation of preparing udon noodles—salad udon,
grilled udon, dipping udon, curry udon—in their noodle shop, where I ate
daily . And I learned the words for photocopier and vitamins when I came
home to find the living room filled variously with those items. They were
always trying to make another buck. From time to time, I still think about
those mountains of unsold vitamin bottles.
Which is why I probably spent so much time walking the city. The house
was a bit nuts. The backstreets  and alleys of Tokyo healed me with their
relative sanity . I was drawn to Shinjuku again and again because I felt a
kinship. If our kind roamed this city, this is where they’d be. The one place
in Tokyo where all social strata brushed shoulders beneath Jumbotrons and
blinking neon. I’d watch indie bands perform on the street below Studio
Alta’ s giant screen (Alta-mae,  as the spot was dubbed). I’d walk Shinjuku’ s
Kabukicho neighborhood—the area filled with touts and prostitutes and
companions and “happening” bars (where it was said customers had sex
with each other out in the open; my shock at this making me more and more
aware of my puritanical moral baselines) and perhaps the highes t density of
broken humans in all of Tokyo. There’ s a small park in the middle of the
district that’s famous for runaways. Hello, friends, I’d think to myself,
standing on the edge of that neighborhood or sitting in that park.
It was then I bought my first Nikon from one of the many used camera
shops, meager budget, something cheap, but even so: The sharp edges of
the metal body and pleasing heft of glass felt enchanting in hand. I wanted
to look more closely at the city, but was also shy, uncertain, and felt the
camera call to me as a silent partner and witness. Below the neon, holding
my new tool, I learned the word ryōkai—“yes, sir!”—as a military
affirmative, deployed playfully . It appeared in a cellphone text from an
older student, a guy I looked up to tremendously back then (still do). He
didn’ t know how to slot my history into a socioeconomic hierarchy , had
never before met someone from  my station in the world. His gaze was new
and in that newness I felt acute ly that I could be something other than our
past.
...
From John, I’ve learned so many words, of course. And more generally ,
I’ve learned the power of elevated language, lexical elegance, to curry
favor , to engender supporters and comrades on our adventures. With
particular fondness, I remember  a phrase he used in a tiny village on one of
our walks together , a village between mountains in a long, thin valley:
Okotoba ni amaimashite . Said when the mad keeper of a small shrine
invited us to see its stuffed god— a squirrel. Meaning, basically , I melt upon
those sweet wor ds of yours .
...
Arguably , the most boring place in Japan to listen to the languag e is Tokyo.
Everyone talks like a television  announcer or newscaster or dour Catholic
priest. Go to Osaka to hear dirty talk; sit on the subway there and you’ll
likely hear two women openly discussing the filthy cocks of their
boyfriends, all slang and twisted grammars. Go way down to Kagoshima—
down on the tip of Kyushu, one of the country’ s southernmost points—and
the language itself sounds almost foreign, many words entirely different
words, a kind of bayou banter wrested from that side of Japan’ s complicated
history with Korea, of them enslaving tens of thousands of potte rs and with
them, their kiln-and-clay technology , in the 1500s. Kyushu—a land of
incredible ceramics and language, much gleaned from ancient elsewheres.
The Kii Peninsula strikes a balance. The accents are thick but not
indecipherable. For me, this is one of the great pleasures of the place—the
language. It feels familiar , holds a working-class sturdiness in its directness,
a pleasing tether to where we came from. I feel we know these people.
In my mind, the conversations of the Peninsula are all tied to a specific
pass, stretch of road, corner of a field. Anonymous topographies to
everyone else, but particular and singular in my mind. Every conversation
here is fused with the spot of earth I stood upon, the abandoned car I
flanked when it happened. And so each time I walk these routes, these same
paths, the conversations come back as if from a chorus hidden in the forest.
I walk and think of another phrase, too: “fanny fucker .” We heard it in
first grade. An older kid, eight ies bully—you remember the type: casual
homophobia, jean jacket—sat next to me on the bus and lobbed it in my
face.
FANNYFUCKERF ANNYFUCKERF ANNYFUCKERF ANNYFUCKER. I
was frozen in confusion. Didn’ t know “fanny ,” barely knew “fucker .” Had
no idea of the implication. My mom was waiting for me at the bus stop. I
got off and as the yellow bus lumbered away , I gave it the finger and yelled,
FANNY  FUCKER TO YOU, TOO.
She almost fainted.
...
Tell me, Bryan, if this wasn’ t true: Nothing was unutterable, and we
relished each lexical smack, each taboo, the rotten skeins of which we wove
into our lives. We were no saint s and had no saintly archetypes.  Your father
was present in a diaphanous kind of way, tobacco always in hand, watching,
distant. A man who had fallen from his Harley and had half his butt grafted
onto his thighs, who delivered mail for some thirty years, always in shorts
even in three feet of winter snow , showing off those scars, who had a trick
of placin g a lit cigarette in his ear and blowing smoke out his mouth, who
left book s of truly tasteless jokes lying around, some of the only books we
saw, books filled with retards and crackers and faggots and assholes and—
callously , violently , unfor givably—things far worse. This was the ambient
language of our world, a kind of perverted tea ceremony .
As you know , we never spoke any of these words in my home. Me living
with my mom, grandmother , and grandfather . Perhaps it was our half-
hearted commitm ent to Catholicism (church on Sunday , but leaving right
after communio n, never engaging with the group) that provided the moral
propriety? Regardless, it was these conventions of our home, conventions
into which my grandfather dug his heels, that created some thin bulwark
against the rest of the town, that maybe saved me in the end.
“Fart” itself was considered as bad as anything a local tobacco farmer
might yell in anger . I had to prime friends to tone it down. Chill man, chill.
My grandfather would have none of it. But the borders of a home extend
only so far, and the rest of town was off-limits to his rules. The cursed
words were simply there, picked up by us in the way that language is
unconsciously absorbed by children, deployed without pomp. Phrases
designed to cut a person down, to dehumanize a man—and then more
rottenness beyond that. Language as a mechanism of self-binding.
Language used when you feel a scarcity—of opportunity and resources. If I
can’t get out of this mess, no way I’m letting you get out, either . That’ s what
these words signify , I see this now. A tribal language of scarcit y that when
spoken out loud makes the scarcity more and more real. True to their name:
curses. We were cursing ourselv es a billion times over. Curses ever-present
in the hearts and mouths of the kids and adults of town, spread across the
entirety of the neighborhood, tethered to no single spot.



So when I yelled  that homophobic taunt toward the bus, you can imagine
my mother ’s disbelief. A shock ing delta between what the town harbored
and what existe d behind our closed doors, what my family had hoped for
me.
A different kind of disbelief flashes over the faces of the women on the
Peninsula as I say hello to them . Not because I greet them with bigotry , but
because I greet them at all, on their terms—mimicking their fluent
looseness. A looseness that is still polite, crafty in reverence and—coming
from a face like mine—makes them smile. My greetings on the Peninsula
feel like a palino de to the words of that kid on the bus, those dumb books,
whatever fears had been elevate d back across the ocean. What we learned
as kids, I have tried to shed like the skin of a snake, though I know it well
still. Know it is embedded in my heart, in the hearts of many of us from that
town. In penance, I try to present something else. Somethin g lucid and
buoyant. Overcompensating for an unintentionally felonious past. I hold on
to the hope that contrition is fixed within the steps of the very walk itself.
Each step, an apology . A million apologies. I want to kiss the foreheads of
everyone I see.
AROUND HERE
Compact mount ain village. I pass the oldest of ladies—nearly horizontal,
pale blouse, wide-brimmed straw hat—between cinder -block walls down a
back lane. Hello! I yell and smile wide with my eyes, though hers don’t rise
to meet them. A few seconds later, to herself: Well, I recko n that boy
weren’ t from around here.
MARUT ANBO
Oh, honey , this your first time? The waitress is in her seven ties, didn’ t
flinch when I entered. Opened thirty-four years ago, Marutanbo operates
out of a log cabin on Route 42 just a bit south of the sleepy village of
Misedani. The original owner had recently passed. She is described as a
vivacious and hilarious woman, named to me only as “Mam a.” In the
corner is a small shrine for her with a kind-looking portrait. My waitress
was her elementary-school classmate.
The night before I had stayed in a nonsensically opulent Marriott, nestled
between day-wo rker digs. It was part of a revitalization effort between the
local governmen t and Marriott—they got tax incentives to build a handful
of them along the coast of the Peninsula. Was it working? Who knew . But it
was funny to stay there because of how different it felt. I was the only one
staying last night. And yet the employees—having been shipp ed in from
other parts of the country to work this Marriott for a little while before
running off elsewhere—never really “opened up,” didn’ t chat. The chasm
between the general kindness of this Marutanbo woman (and the inn owners
and other folks along the road) before me and the studied, city formality of
that Marriott—no vernacular to be enjoyed in their Tokyo-no-accent
language, never going off script—was jarring. When I asked locals about
the new Marriott they all said, I hear that place ain’t got a bath. Who’d
wanna stay at such a thing for such a price. (I gotta say, the shower was
pretty great, though.)
My masked-up waitress make s approving eye contact each time she
passes by and doesn’ t seem fazed that I’m an out-of-towner or that there
probably hasn’ t been an out-of-towner in here for some time. She explains
how the owner ’s son (in the back, cooking) and daughter -in-law  had taken
over the restaurant after their mother passed away . How the regulars are
legion (but nowhere to be seen today) and well, heck, hon, if this is your
first time then you just have  to try the uni sea urchin pasta.
I like uni (sometimes), but not necessarily on my pasta. Instead, I get the
fried aji—horse mackerel—set lunch. It is crisp and voluminous. I order an
iced coffee and it arrives pre-sw eetened like at Howdy , in a kind of glass
bowl, almost like a cold dessert soup.
Marutanbo is a kissa, but it’s also a roadside diner with exposed  logs and
“folksy” vibes. I haven’ t been here before but have seen many places like it
elsewhere in the world.
...
Bryan, you and I wanted a stack of pancakes the height of our faces.
Wanted them covered in syrup and for that syrup to be mostly on the table.
Wanted to unscrew and mix up the salt and pepper shakers like idiot
hooligans.
We could bike to the Greek diner from home without much trouble.
Biking to the diner was fine, but not much farther . Routes were cut short by
highways and throughways, roads too big and brutal, too full of tractor -
trailers, for even us to cross, roads that chopped cities and states into
socioeconomic zones. Entirely different potentials for life (and tax bases)
literally across the street.
Here, on Kii, too, and in many other parts of Japan, highw ays have
changed lives. Towns that once  had through-traf fic from backroad drivers
were made redundant as bypasse s chopped them off. I’ve walke d down tiny
Main Streets that were so ghostly you expected tumbleweeds. But you
could also imagine what once was: a collection of local shops, dry-goods
stores, beauty salons, a small theater . And two hundred years before that,
even more, when the dirt road was pure pilgrimage and purre d with foot
traffic.
What did the highways do to us? They boxed us in. Kept us riff-raff at
bay. Followed the edges of farms. We saw plenty of evidence of the town’ s
agricultural origins near our homes. Only had to bike two minutes and you
were at the fields. Everything, once, fields, before other industries took
over. The efficiency of capital may push places “forward.” But what
happens when that capital retreats?
Boxed in by those swaths of concrete, that Greek diner was about as far as
we could go. Shorts, dirty knees, buzz-cuts, scabby knuckles, caricatures of
ourselves, we’d  burst in and the old waitress—probably young, probably
just twenty , but feeling old and older still after her endless shifts, and
impossibly old to our fresh kiddie eyeballs—would welcome us with a
weary smile, knowing the mess that was in store.
Years later—older and alone, while organizing my father ’s funeral and
taking care of his home and sorting polka records—I’d end up back at
another diner . Not the one we knew . Ten times the size of anyth ing we saw.
It has been eleven years since I had moved to Japan, and in the interim it
felt like the whole country had scaled itself up in some grotesq ue foie gras
of life. The lot of the mega-din er teemed with trucks—pickup trucks and
SUVs but also homemade trucks, cars that looked like they had been
hacked into trucks—roofs removed, back seats turned into flatbeds—trucks
painted with fingernail polish and others washed and waxed and shining so
bright you were afraid they might light you on fire.
Inside, it was like ascending to the heavenly plane to which all diners
aspired. It was so crowded I had to wait twenty minutes in a vast Disney-
esque shopping purgatory . I saw a man with a gun on his belt who was not a
cop. I saw one hundred rocking chairs all in a row. I saw stacks of jam and
jelly. I saw cowboy hats. I saw boots and plaid. You could buy antlers. I
heard Kenny Rogers, and thought about how we never knew when to hold
or fold anything , how it felt as if things were constantly held or folded for
us, often in spite of us.
I saw kids—skin  white as bleac hed sheets, revealed just above T-shirt tan
lines—jump around, smack into people as if running through soap bubbles.
Everyone was white. I was white. We would have slotted in just fine here.
Been a couple of the happy little shits flopping about. Having spent the
majority of my twenties in Japan, it had been a while since I’d been in a
place I didn’ t know, and yet was so readily accepted as a local. There was
no second-guessing how to speak to me, no hiccups with language, no
shock at my ability to speak or implicit or explicit questioning  of where I
was “really” from, no looks as if I were a horse that had wandered into a
shop and had begun lecturing about physics. The realization was a shock:
Standing there, I was able to slide into someone else’s world by dint of
simply leaning against a wall. And yet—something had failed us on this
side of the ocean  and I was still trying to pick it apart. Somethin g systemic,
not any one person or thing, but the whole of it all, and no matter how easy
it may have felt to slide back, I knew then I could never return.
Around me, the crowd fused into the singular , the blob smiled, picked up
jars of fruit. Something in the parking lot caterwauled and not a single eye
blinked. You and I were everywhere in this tangle. Astride huge parents,
attenuated kids with towhead mops made gun shapes with their fingers and
killed one another—BANGBANG.
...
In an empty Marutanbo I put “sauce” on my fried aji and slurp  miso soup
alone at a corner table.
You and I alwa ys asked for more and more butter , more syrup, more
chaos at our Greek joint.
In that old coun try diner I mixed grits with hushpuppies. Slopped some
combination of gravy and fried catfish onto my buttered biscuit, tried to
take a bite, spilt it atop my over-easy eggs. Created a slurry of food,
switched to eating with a spoon.
In Marutanbo, the waitress keep s asking what I need, what she can do for
me, if I want more rice, more coffee, more water . Mama woulda loved a
handsome boy like you, she says. The ceiling is covered in plastic flowers,
like a Danish painting flipped upside down.




LOGGERS
The route this morning leads me past some loggers. Two men working the
cedar forest. I could smell their tobacco a ways off. They were felling trees
and a slender cedar crashed down about twenty feet from my skull. I
popped out from the brush along the path and they looked at me like I was a
leprechaun, like they hadn’ t almost hit me with a tree. They laughed and
laughed. Laughing still, the whole way through my morning route.
YUKATA
Furusato Onsen is nestled between low mountain passes, a sort of micro-
Eden, presents itself as groves of mikan  manda rins picked by elderly
women. There is a beach area that maybe sees some tourist action around
the Obon holidays in August, but today it was desolate.
I eat dinner alone in a gilded room at an opulent inn. The walls and
ceiling are paint ed gold, and everything placed upon the table takes on an
otherworldly lambency . They serve boiled ise-ebi,  a type of lobste r the size
of a cat, splayed  in half, the brains on display . Bryan, you would  have fallen
over had you seen the thing. Considered it a monster , said, I will trade you
all my damn baseball cards to keep that away from me. Slurp it up, I would
have said—now that I was so culinarily refined—just pick up that head bit
and tip it into your mouth there. And you would have fake gagged, said, No
freakin’  way, never never never never .
Truth be told, I still can’ t eat shit like this.
...
Smack in the middle of the village, between shrubs and fields and farm
machinery , is a public bath. I had gone earlier in the day. Despit e Covid, the
locker room was mayhem. Farmers aplenty . Everyone was wizened, gaunt,
but looked stron g, like they had been hacked from granite, bodies of bone
and muscle and nothing else. Their tan lines were so sharp that their skin
looked like burnt toast, like it was painted on. Their elasticat ed genitalia
hung down to their knees. One man bent over and spread his ass cheeks in
my direction. I don’t think he meant anything by it. Another palavered as he
stretched spread -eagle on a wooden bench I made a mental note to never
touch.
Once, on another trip to this bath, as I sat back in the scalding waters
looking up at the skylight, a man walked in with testicles the size of
grapefruits, colored frostbite-black. They looked almost attached to the
bottom of his stomach, seemed to occlude his whole crotch. Did he have a
penis? We’ll never know . The scene reminded me of a passage from
Antonio Tabucchi’ s Indian Nocturne,  a book I read soon after arrivi ng in
Japan, and which lodged itself in my mind as a near-perfect mystery , a
tenderly written travelogue:
In the first bed was an old man. He was completely naked and very thin.
He looked dead, but kept his eyes wide open and looked at us without
any trace of expression. He had an enormous penis curled up on his
abdomen.… “He’ s a sādhu,” said the doctor . “His genital organs are
consecrated to God; once he was worshipped by infertile women, but he
has never procreated in his life.”
The public bath demystifies. Any weirdness we may have felt about our
own nakedness could have been so easily and readily erased with a single
communal dunk. Think you have weird balls? Think again. Now we know
how big balls can get, and how even if they get that big, looking like
they’ve rotted in place, a man can still walk freely , nakedly , showing off his
unique testicularity to other farmers with no trace of shame, dipping his
sacks of coal into the steaming waters, consecrated to the kami  of the bath,
letting out a big sigh. Tabucchi would have marveled.
Life is strange and life goes on.
Back in the locker room, a drunken guy—he smelled of sake, trembled,
lurched—kept insisting I was putting my yukata  robe on backwa rds. No, it’s
right over left, right over left, he said, growin g more intense, other folks in
the locker room now looking at us, laughing. Left over right is how women
do it, he said, you ain’ t a woman  are you?
Cocks were flopping everywhere. None of us were textbook women. For
a second I panic ked, thought I might have had it wrong all these years. But,
no. A lot of folks get things wrong more often than you’d think . Adults you
once thought had it all together were just, in the end, improvising the whole
way. This guy, with some robe axe to grind, wasn’ t trying to get me to do it
the “manly” way, but rather the way of death; the dead are wrapped right-
atop-left.
I told the farmer , Alright buddy , if you do it, I’ll do it, too.
...
Back in my inn at night, alone,  thinking of you, I eye those boiled lobster
brains in that golden dining room. Later , I slip into my futon and check my
nuts—saying a little prayer of gratitude for their appropriate size. And close
my eyes, still wrapped like a corpse, as if I were to be laid in the ground
come first light.


THE ROPE
Nine in the morning, a weekday . With a belly full of strange sea beasts, I set
off. I climb one quick mountain  pass and pop out at a working shoreline.
Weather -beaten wooden and fiberglass boats are lined up along the beach.
Nets, buoys. The sand a mix of brown shells and pebbles, some worn
smooth, others jagged. A single boat floats off the coast. Nearby , two
savage-looking men—stained overalls, red faces, several days of beard
growth—stand in a parking lot. They see me come down from the mountain
and start walking toward me, yelling: THIS YOUR ROPE?! THIS YOUR
DAMNED ROP E?! They move with unexpected ferocity , and I yell back,
No it ain’t my damn rope! Jesus! Why would that be my rope?! And they
yell, OKA Y! THA T’S WHA T WE THOUGHT!
THAT FIGHTING IMPULSE
Morons, I thought. Idiots. Fools.  Punk-ass dipshits. A litany of verbal snares
lay jacke d and ready in my mind. Traps set long ago. Set first by that bully
on the bus and then built into a shit-filled kingdom of insults. In our town
you were bashed  and then you fought back—words, fists, or worse—or the
bashing continu ed. We saw it many times: Without retaliation kids were
driven far inside of themselves, had their fires snuffed out before they made
it to high school. A bunch of good kids defeated by the age of fourteen.
I learned to bite. Literally . You remember , Bryan, you were there. The
older brother of a friend had fucked with me for ages, finally put me in a
headlock, so I bit into his fleshy white freckled arm. Salt on the tongue.
Cheap move, but it worked and he stayed off. Decades later, I’d hear he
tried to kill himself, heartbroken, between shifts of laying floors.
On the bus we ranked on each other hard. I didn’ t yet understa nd how to
ignore the attacks, didn’ t have the skill set for defusing abuse. As such, my
first formal compositions were  all toxins and flare. Discovere d a natural
talent that was useful within the Lord of the Flies  hierarc hy of the bus.
Anyone could be Piggy at any moment. I wasn’ t bothered by the sight of
emotional wounds, was willing to cut to the bone and then some. Laid the
others flat, and laid myself flat before anyone else could, too.
Everyone knew I was adopted. You could feel the kids ready to pounce, as
kids do, thinking for the first time about what it meant to throw away a
human being. You don’t know? they’d ask, giggling. You don’t know who
your real parents are?
And to protect myself—to sting myself so hard they couldn’ t possibly
hurt me more than I hurt myself—I’d say my mom was probably a whore, a
slut, a drug addict. Hell, pregnant at thirteen, what else could she have
been? Raped, probably , by some loser .
The kids froze, backed off. I was drawing inspiration from the painful
deficits I felt around us. Pain generational and layered. Pain those kids also
knew but perhaps had never fully considered, and certainly never
articulated with such barbarity . The same pain that made a kid reach for
headlocks instead of acts of generosity .
I’d fill myself with that essence, that foul essence, and look those kids in
the eyes and perform this violence on the idea of my birth mother , scare
those classmates  with a cruelty that also scared me, of which I didn’ t know
I was capable.
Before adoption could be weaponized against me, I sent it up nuclear . And
in doing so, instilled the notion that: Shit, Craig wild. Don’ t fuck with him.
You know that mindset, Bryan. You lived it out more fully than I ever did.
Spend youth in our scarcity mindset—a mindset where we have little value,
are shown little value, where we don’t feel protected, where we feel like it
could all slip away with one wrong move—and the voice never really
disappears. Somewhere, in a corner of our minds, is a little kid forever
ready to go to the mat.
The walk is many things, but it’s also a way to say to that kid: Look man,
I appreciate you being there back in the day. What you did was tough, brave
in a way, but we’re good now, you can go. No headlocks, no guns, no
violence here.
There’ s a different tenor of scarcity on the Peninsula. It’s strange, as poor
as the Peninsula may be, I never feel the dangers we felt back home. I
developed a nervous tic in the fourth grade. I blinked so much I was
nicknamed “Blinky.” Can now see that I was hyperventilat ing, having
anxiety attacks in response to the stresses of those dangers, instabilities.
Something here works on a higher level. You can’t fall that far. Maybe it’s
as stupid ly banal as universal healthcare—knowing everyone I pass can get
help, and does get help. Or the shared sense of community . Even as the
population thins out, not all people are abandoned. (Though of course there
are those who do live in crushing isolation and loneliness; less
“abandonment” and more the loss of everyone they know .) Whatever it is,
I’ve learned scarcity can exist without also being cursed, without self-
binding a population into spiritual poverty .
And so, every day on this road becomes a chance for renewal.  A chance
for me to show that little kid in my mind that the world we’re now in is one
of abundance, of life, so different from the world we came from, and that
you don’t need to kill yourself (or the idea of yourself or your birth mother)
to save yourself.
With each hello  to a Peninsula shop owner , or farmer , or drunken horse
bettor , I feel the entirety of my body activate, the heart rise in minor
transcendence, and for a second I inhabit some version of who we could
have been much sooner , had the right systems been in place.
Like this, the walk becomes an ascetic practice. Creates a space for an
aggregate change of the heart and mind. A thousand days and tens of
thousands of moments engende ring renewal. But every now and then you
catch a couple jackasses stealing a rope. It may feel like they want a fight,
and that’s fine. That scarcity-bo rn kid in the mind stands up, smiles wide,
brushes the dirt off his jeans. These motherfuckers ain’t nothing, he says.
He’s ready , always ready , and he knows we can take ’em.
FLAME TREE
Most of the Peninsula parks are sad, broken, dying, already dead. Some—
brand-new though. Some have been rebuilt for children who no longer
exist, who may never return. Too lonely even for ghosts. And yet, they are
everywhere, up and down the coast. The broader municipalities have park
budgets, and those budgets don’t necessarily correlate with child head-
counts or even population figures. So funds are deployed. Construction
crews are put to work. And you have these plots, mostly packed dirt with a
scrabble of weeds baked dry by a blazing sun. Mostly silent, like a still
from a film. I think often of the closing scene from Akira Kurosawa’ s Ikiru
—the story  of a dying governmen t employee, working to get a small park
made in central Tokyo before he expired. The protagonist sits on a swing set
in his newly made snow-duste d park. Sometimes here on the Peninsula,
you’ll see an old man sitting in the shade, two hands resting on a cane.
Sometimes there are a few kids running around, and spying them feels as
sensational as finding a one-eyed toad.
Anyway—I adore them, these woebegone parks that don’t make any
sense.
They usually contain a single plaything: a spring-loaded cartoon
Doraemon head, a puppy teeter -totter once colorful, now desaturated like a
poster of a young beauty left too long in a pharmacy’ s south-faci ng window .
These open spaces are so raw they bring to mind the nineteenth century ,
games like stickball. A place to roll an iron barrel hoop? Sure. But also, I
think: poo tag. We played poo tag as if life itself depended on it. It seems so
fundamental and obvious to the mind of a child—to place shit on the end of
a stick and run after one another . It must be done here, too, in these desolate
parks. I refuse to believe otherwise.
A lone evergreen flames up toward clouds, like the hair on a character
from a fighting game. I see not a tree but a line of quarters on an arcade
machine—a borderless afternoon in a windowless mall. You by my side, me
lending you coins because I always had more and my games lasted longer . I
was always embarrassed by that gap between us. Even though  my family
didn’ t have much, you had less. Those games were backgrounded against
smudged plaster , the sticky-sweet punch of cinnamon buns baking in the
distance. Beside us, teenagers wore red bandannas, blue hats—gang
symbols. We quickly learned who to let win. On the Peninsula, the
manicured trees are backgrounded against the heavy tile roof of a
neighboring house. Sea salt in the air, I’ve not seen a single teenager
anywhere. The colors here, just plain colors.


ANTS
Fact of the day from the “Book  of John”: The curiously vivid  expression
“like ants on the Kumano pilgrim age” is first seen in a Portuguese-Japanese
dictionary from 1603. Meaning, back then—especially back then—these
roads were jam-packed, peaking  with walkers centuries ago. In a way, I’m
walking a kind of post-apocaly ptic version of these paths. Way, way, way
beyond their apex, their pinnacle of usage. In the 1600s you would have
seen hundreds of thousands of walkers, dirt streets lined with stalls,
mountain passe s replete with tea shops, extreme levels of revelry and
prostitution all about. Very much like ants, that endless stream of long-dead
walkers.
Today , I walk atop hard asphal t. I am alone in the walk. The trees are
mostly gone, the sun brutally hot, made hotter each year by collective
stupidity . I can’t help but wonder what will be written about these roads
four hundred years from now. Will the walk will be gone entirely? Will it
have reverted back to somethin g like before? Perhaps this is more special
than I realize, me walking now. Perhaps what I’m doing today will be
looked back on in awe and wonder , when such a thing like this was
possible.

KISSA  VEIL
The morning is dismal and wet. Feeling dispirited, I turn a corner , pass an
abandoned love hotel, cross some train tracks, and see CAFE HOUSE VEIL,
PART TWO.
Part One was a mystery , and remains so.
A sign on Part Two’s door reads, DUE TO CURRENT  CIRCUMST ANCES WE
RESPECTFULL Y TEMPORARIL Y DECLINE OUT -OF-PREFECTURE CUST OMERS.  They
mean COVID, viruses. Mie Prefecture has almost no cases. And though
most of Japan has very few cases, everyone is being extra -cautious. I
suspect this is directed at truck drivers more than folks like me—someone
dripping and desperate for coffee. Technically I was an “out-of-prefecture
customer ,” but I’ve also been in prefecture for weeks by this point. Wary of
offense, I stick my nose in; the place is packed. I lift a single finger in the
saddest gesture I can muster , and they welcome me with a bit of reluctance.
I dribble all over a corner table. Elderly farmers in groups of two and four
read their newspapers in silenc e. They seem unconcerned. For a couple
measly bucks I’m served two neatly sliced pieces of toast, salad, and a hot
coffee. Outside the rain comes down like the splash of a parted sea. I could
have sat here for years.
On the way out, I ask the owners what was up with the COVI D sign—I
had seen a few shops with similar ones along the way. The owners, a
husband and wife so elderly it makes me wonder if there are laws against
over-age workin g, shrug, act almost as if the sign doesn’ t exist. A customer
at the counter sucking on a vape  pen lets out a huge puff of watermelon and
says, Anyway , ain’ t like we can really  tell who’ s from ’round here or not.
OCEAN
I come out of the mountains and see the ocean and it feels like the end of
the world. Like I’m just supposed to keep walking and let it swallow me.
The village before me has a seawall cleaving town from water’s edge.
From the homes, all you can see is concrete—the ocean replace d by a gray
slab intersecting the sky, like a cruel James Turrell installation. This is not
uncommon—huge portions of Japan’ s coast are cordoned off like this. I
walk atop the wall, up on its dystopian promenade. To my left, waves
rumble like far-off tractor -trailers. To my right, the town is silent. Only an
old man stands below in his backyard in the shadow of the barrier, moving
rubber hoses around. I smile and wave. I ask him when the seawall was
built and he hums up to me a story about the Isewan Typhoon in 1959, and
how it did ’em in. That typhoo n, sure, but also the tsunamis years earlier .
Nature seemed intent on carrying the ocean right into these coastal towns.
The old wall was small, he says. But this one—the one I’m walking on,
standing on—is huge. Eight meters high. Safe as can be. And as he speaks I
can’t shake the notion: The ocean, it does not care about your walls and will
eat these walls when the day comes.
...
Disasters of the last decade are so well documented, it makes you wonder
what we’d think  about Moses splitting the Red Sea, had the Israelites been
carrying smartphones. Today , no matter the horror , hours of footage are just
a tap away . After the triple disaster in 2011—the quake, the tsunami, the
nuclear -plant meltdown in north ern Japan—I watched, you bet I watched.
And this is what I saw:
When the shakin g stops and the sirens wail you’ll have about ten minutes
to climb high. Close to the ocean, it’s hard to imagine the waters rising,
having never seen the waters rise before. It’s like trying to imagine a
mountain in the distance doing jumping-jacks, or a hundred-year -old cedar
breaking into a sprint. An ocean rising at the level of tsunami seems simply
beyond our reality , veering into the realm of supernatural. It’s made all the
more pernicious because—the tsunami comes not as a grand, violent,
singular attack, but rather as devious waves, kilometers in length growing
by centimeters in height, sneaky bastards, amplified by the narrowing of
bays, like the floor of the ocean  itself is rising on a horrible escalator to the
stars. One mom ent the water is below the low seawalls. Secon ds pass and
now it’s slipping over, spilling into the streets like the ocean is in a cup and
someone bumpe d it. You can’t imagine more, and yet it comes. The volume
is celestial. The water turning blacker and blacker , like oil, carrying more of
the dregs of the ocean. The sirens wail. The announcements implore. Mere
moments to get higher , that’s all you got. You climb the steps of a nearby
shrine. Your sense of physics is off. Surely the water can’t get this high. It
flows without sentiment into the streets of the village, enters homes through
their first-floor windows and doors, begins to push back cars, vending
machines, dumpsters. Styrofoam boxes spill and bob, all manner of fishing
and farming tools float off. The gate of the shrine is nearly covered. You
climb higher . Now the sound s of water pressure doing its thing: the
creaking of crushed metal, of splitting wood, of ceramic roof tiles sliding,
of cars compressing, of glass windows exploding. One car is pushed onto
the horn of another and it blares continuously . A sound designed for traffic,
to signal a minor annoyance, now screaming uselessly at the sea. All the
homes are submer ged. You climb higher again and the water follows.
Surrounded by the folks of your town, you look on in disbelief. It’s all gone.
I carried up my grandfather , someone says, meaning his ashes. It’s the only
thing they had time to grab. No one howls or moans or cries. Nature,
someone says to no one, can’ t be stopped.
...
I walk a different town. The sun is strong and directly overhead. I am
sweating throug h my shirt. Every few blocks lamppost signs remind me
with curious precision of how high I am above sea level: 5 METERS. 8.3
METERS.  And instructions: RUN THIS WAY IF YOU FEEL  AN EAR THQUAKE LAST
MORE THAN A MIN UTE, reads one. EVER Y SECOND. EVER Y METER COU NTS, reads
another . This is life by the ocean. There is no eclipsing wave- wall in this
town. The ocean is plainly visible. I love this, this honesty . Paradoxically
this visibility , this lack of “protection,” is what saved people in past
tsunamis—being able to see, after a quake, the waters subtly change in
anticipation, to know what was coming, the terrible waves. Without the wall
there is no trading of beauty for some false hope of deliveranc e. Here, the
water forever scintillates in the corner of my eye. It feels good  to be near
the water and good to see ships heading out, to feel a town work the water
and pull life from the water , ready to accept whatever may come.

SHITHOLES AND NOT SHITHOLES
Where’d you eat lunch, the father of the inn asks me.
I tell him and his wife where I ate lunch and the wife looks confused and
says, Where?
And he says, Oh, you know the one, that shithole down the road. We all
laugh. It was true. It was kind of a shithole, the restaurant down  the road. A
married couple having run the place for decades, caring no longer . They
served up a sloppy pasta, wet and overcooked.
But this inn? Nothing sloppy , nothing overcooked. The owner is a heavy
kitchen drinker , but never fails to deliver class. And the wife cares more
than I’ve ever seen. I’ve stayed at this inn many times. Their two grandkids
run out from the back to greet me. Extremely rare around these parts, this
central-Peninsula area in partic ular—children. The town is disappearing
rapidly . The entire elementary school has only fourteen students. Each
teacher juggles two grades simultaneously .
And yet, this inn persists. Gourmands from all over the country make
pilgrimage. First and second generation keep it going side by side. The son
and father shop at the morning market and cook all day. The mother and
daughter -in-law manage and or ganize.
The inn is about a day’s walk south of Furusato Onsen. It’s almost too
much, to stack a Furusato Onsen stay back-to-back with this inn. So much
complex, opulent deliciousness in so little time. But I can’ t help myself.
This inn has only four rooms. Fairly standard size for inns of this type.
Four jewel boxes. The inn is technically a minshuku—bed-and-breakfast.
Which is considered a lower rank than ryokan,  your classic fancy-pants
countryside hot-spring inn.
But I’ve never seen a minshuku  like this (hell, never seen a ryokan like
this). The entire space overflow s with elevated details, nearly perfect in my
opinion—elegant, considered woodwork along the walls, fresh flowers
blooming in classic vases, spacious rooms with fresh tatami mats, fragrant
tea and mikans served upon arrival, hanging brush scrollwork, a communal
seating area on the second floor with a view of the ocean. That may sound
like many inns around Japan, but there is a soulful purity to this place, the
fact that the family running it is so involved, so present—so persistently and
wholly present— that it feels like visiting the home of your amazing
grandmother and grandfather , who happen to both be Pritzker -award-
winning architects, Michelin-starred chefs, ikebana  geniuses, and
hospitality Zen masters.
The family here loves their work so much you feel it infect your own
heart. The wife greets me with a warmth you cannot fake. Whatever this inn
is in totality , it cannot be faked. To get to it is onerous. Hours and hours of
trains from the nearest big city. It’s in the thick of the Peninsula. Still,
visitors come from all over. I found it by accident. Years ago on my very
first walk of this road, I was exhausted, saw the inn along an otherwise
desolate strip. Knocked. They greeted me with startling alacrity . Though I
hadn’ t booked they made space for me, showered me in welcomes and that
tea and those oranges. I’m still reeling from that first stay. I thought I knew
about omotenashi  selfless service—the kind of service that all the expensive
inns aspire to, that Japan is so famous for, that customer -above-all knock-
your-socks-of f service—but in their kindness I realized everything prior had
been a shadow of this, had hoped to be this, hadn’ t come close.
A friend , now ninety years old, who has run a gorgeous ryokan on the
coast of Kyushu for some sixty years, once told me, hotels are just
prepubescent ryokans. “Inns without hair” is the exact quote. And staying
here, you feel it wholly—how refined and mature it is compared to your
average hotel. The Marriott ain’t got nothing on this place. A baby at best.
This one—refined, perceptive, warm, welcoming.
The father studi ed food in Kyoto. Says he serves the best karasumi  in all
of Japan. A kind of Japanese caviar . Something I’d never order on my own
but eat here, feeling my palate expand on its bitter saltiness. Even you,
Bryan, would dig this, I bet. Like Richie Rich beef jerky . Ocean Slim Jims
consumed like the body of Chris t—a thin wafer of salt upon the tongue. The
dad met his wife at college in Nagoya. True love. She had taken a few years
off and worked as an au pair in a wealthy college town abroad. They stayed
in touch as she saw famous men in the 1960s give historical speeches about
human rights in front of hundreds of thousands gathered around vast plazas.
Hippies, school buses, happenin gs. Somehow went from there back to here.
The heart won. They are a comedic duo. She slaps his forehead . Their love
is hard-earned and everywhere.
The entire inn is laid out with tatami mats. Something you don’t see often.
Usually , the hallways and corridors of inns are finished with beautiful
hardwood, gloss ed under the padding of a thousand guests. Normally , you
wear slippers on the hardwood and take them off when entering a tatami
room. Never  slippers on the tatami. That’ s the first thing you learn at an inn.
(I once took one slippered step on a tatami mat and John almost  vomited all
over the hallway , such was his shock at my faux pas.) But this on and off of
slippers—it’ s a drag. Truly, it stinks. Even at expensive inns, the slippers
are often stiff and cheap. No fur-lined coziness. They’re merely  vessels for
conveying your stockinged feet from one tatami surface to another. And the
slippers never fit. Walking up stairs in them makes you feel like a duck. You
have to waddle to keep them on your feet. If you can’t tell—I don’t like
slippers. Most people don’t like slippers. This inn realized that. Realized if
they just used tatami mats everywhere, they wouldn’ t need slippers, could
be done with the on-again, off-again annoyances, and the messiness of
slippers splayed in front of doors to guest rooms, sullying the otherwise
perfect lines of their hallways. Thoughtful decisions like these; God, I love
this place.
The wife further explains that they put tatami everywhere to give the inn a
more homespun feel. Didn’ t want to get too highfalutin. (She says as her
husband croons about his cavia r skills.) If you put tatami everywhere, she
explains, it’ll keep the inn humble, helps us keep the price low (and it is
pretty low considering the splendor of the food). But let me tell you:
Nothing about it feels low. Each  time I stay, their kindness and meals fill me
with hope. A strange contrast. In the surrounding homes past which I walk,
people die alone. Few children persist. How long can this go on for? It’s
something we don’t discuss. Instead I ask for tips, hints, pointers. Tell me, I
say, where the best non-shithole of tomorrow is.
I SPEAK WITH A FARMER
I speak with a farmer—have we talked before? I don’t think so, but man I
can’t shake the feeling that we have. His flattened nose, pockmarked face,
dusty overalls—I’ve seen him many times from a distance, have spoken
with him up and down the Penin sula. He is watering his crop. He is drunk at
nine A.M. He is covered in beet juice. He is eager to chat and it pains me to
break free from the conversation. (But, I gotta walk.)
...
1955 Japan: 42 per cent rural, 58 per cent urban.
Today? 94 percent urban.
The average age of a Japanese farmer now hovers around sixty-five.
Masashi Kawai, in his bestseller Chronicle of the Futur e, notes the
following timeline:
2024: One-thir d of Japanese ar e over sixty-five.
2027: Ther e will be a shortage of blood for transfusions.
2033: One in thr ee houses will be vacant.
2039: Ther e will be a shortage of cr ematoriums.
2040: 50 per cent of local government will disappear .
2042: The peak of aged population will be r eached.
...
On the ground at an intersection, I find a forgotten sickle . (Probably
forgotten. Feels  forgotte n.) I pick it up and walk thirty yards or so, hook it
into the doorway of a rural train shack (“station” is too refined to apply
here) to be found with certaint y, certain I have done this, too, before. It
hangs down. I know my buddy will find it.
...
I stop in a kissa for coffee and toast on a rain-soaked Tuesday , and across
the room: two women, one young, one older , dressed in black office skirts
and white shirts . Have I seen them before? These women? Ready to sit
behind a desk. Which desk? Where? This tiny team. Nothing like an office
for fifty miles. Déjà vu along the coast.

METH
A decad e back, across the ocean: pure winter starlight, eight at night. I’m
pulled over by a motorcycle cop for “speeding.” Maybe five miles per hour
over the limit. In truth I was profiled: single white male, rental car, out-of-
state plates. He suspected I was involved with meth. (So he tells me later.)
Thought maybe I was cooking, concealing, distributing.
The considerable-sized man had me step out of the car. He poked around.
Some white dust now in your ash-tray, he said. I thought: Why would I
keep cocaine in my ashtray? I had been gone so long the notion of meth as a
thing—never mind what it looked like, how it had become  seemingly
endemic, or if it left a trace—never occurred to me.
What you up to here, he asked now standing extra tall, shining that light
directly in my eyes. He meant the rental car, my out-of-townness. There
were no street lamps on that stretch of road, felt like nothing but fields and
forest in the whole of the unive rse beyond our pocket of aspha lt. Anything
could have happened. Look, I said, I’m just here to bury my father . I’m
alone. He died a few days ago.
This was my adoptive father . The king of farts. The guy divorced soon
after adopting me. He eventually moved far away . Moved with his mother
and sister and brother -in-law . They all passed within years—cancers and
heart attacks. Everyone sick in their own unsurprising ways. He remained,
alone in the woods, and died the same. I spent weeks turning over objects in
his alien home. I slept on the floor . I looked at the last marks he made in
pencil on scraps of paper , measu ring his glucose. He had been ill his whole
life with diabetes and more. It was likely he had committed suicide. This is
what the nurse had told me. She found him well-dead in the hallway of his
home. He had skipped his medi cine. I photographed everything. A camera
between the eye and the world is a powerful tool, a suit of armor , a
microscope and telescope in one. Anyway , I didn’ t know how else to deal
with the situation. I was alone, his entire close family dead, the home—
utterly foreign to me. I photographed the used blue bar of soap in his
shower , the bristle-smooshed toothbrush, the rag over the faucet in the sink,
the tin measuring cup I remembered from when I was a kid, still measuring
things decades later, it seemed. I photographed the stack of Meals on
Wheels meals in his freezer . The expired milk. His polka records next to his
“fancy record player” (the only valuable thing I ever saw him own, the
thing I was instructed never to touch or else: belt. I later googled what it
would have cost in the 1970s: In truth, a very average turntable). I
photographed the smear on the wall where he fell and died—his goo had
rubbed off his face on the way down. Many objects had this goo on them.
His broken body produced it—it oozed from his pores, creating a sort of
heat-mapping of things he touched, building up like stalagmites. I
photographed the goo on the phone receiver . The goo on the light switches.
Yes, he had lived here. I photographed his white Fruit of the Loom undies
in neat stacks on a chair . His home was a duplex and I peered into the half
his mother once inhabited. She had died in her sleep a decade earlier and he
hadn’ t touched the place. I photographed the bed he found her in one
morning, after her heart attack. The pictures of my father on her wall, his
high school portrait, already then looking twenty years older than he was. I
processed this narrative—one of tremendous solitude and sickness and loss
and sadness—alone, thirty years  old, still unsure about my own place in the
world, a few years before I’d start to really  walk.
Oh, what’ s his name? asked the cop.
I told him.
Dang, I knew him. Ate tacos with him. He was a good guy, that daddy of
yours.
Days later, I’d know the cop to be named Duncan and I’d see him atop his
motorcycle, once again flashing his lights, a sobbing rotund lead to our thin
cortège, clearing the way to the burial.
...
I was thinking about my father and his small town in the forest because I
was walking the town of Owase , a town shrinking like many of the towns of
this area. Owase , 25,000 people in 1995. Fewer than 15,000 today . I walk
its streets and think about those still living here. You simply don’t see meth
or heroin in Japan—it exists in such minute quantities, unde r such high
penalties, that digging it up is more trouble than the high could possibly be
worth. Folks reach for alcohol with gusto, sure, but alcohol doesn’ t zombify
you like the powders or black tars or crystals. Alcohol can be horrific, but
the fall from grace isn’ t usually quite as far or fast. And it’ s as legal as rice.
Back across the ocean, a town like Owase might terrify the sensible.
Likely laden with opioid deriv atives. Here, it’s inert and curious. Poke
around, see what’ s behind close d doors. Do so knowing that it’s likely safe.
Bryan, you and I would have snuck into the long-shuttered public bath with
the blue tilework out front were we so inclined. (We most certainly would
have been.) No one squats in these abandoned buildings becau se everyone
has a home.
It is not perfect  here in Japan, of course. The criminal system can be
medieval. Twent y-three days: the length you can be held on almost anything
without a lawyer or outside contact. And then, they can come up with
something else to extend it another twenty-three days, and another . A 99
percent conviction rate. Cells with just a single tatami mat, a light that’s
never turned off. That sort of stuff. And yet, that cop back across the ocean
and the cops here seem to share almost no common origin.
I carry a fondness for much of Owase. How it has the excellent Kumano
Kodō Museum, a museum dedicated to the many UNESCO World
Heritage-certified routes of the Peninsula. How it’s sandwiched between the
two great peaks of the Ise-ji—Magose and Yakiyama. How—after
descending the mountains under rains so unrelenting that they turn the path
into a river—th e young woman working at a convenience store will
graciously check  your head for leeches. You, hopping around like a maniac
thinking you have blood on your hands. But there are no leeches, she
assures you. Are you sure? you’ll ask, traumatized by previous, grisly leech
encounters. Those mountain leeches are crafty , climb trees, drop from
above. Turns out you’re color -blind and the ink from your leather wallet ran
wild in the rains.
...
As kids, we never saw meth or heroin, but cocaine was puzzlingly present
in rumo rs and chance encounte rs. Weed was abundant. As were guns. But
mostly , the prizes to be had were liquor and smokes and porn.  It was said
that us kids could pay a surchar ge to get them from Dairy Mart. We never
had enough cash or guts to find out.
You remember the fights, don’t you? How frequent they were, so
obviously a byproduct of pain.  There was always another shoe about to
drop. Our town was racially and culturally diverse—its greatest gift, by far,
that unexpected diversity . Still the most diverse place I’ve ever lived. A
town favored by immigrants. God, I loved that—walking down the hallway
in high school hearing all those languages. But suffering was everywhere if
you knew where  to look. And the diversity meant that each family seemed
to suf fer uniquely .
Poor “Sammy the Jew” was pounded daily for his bar mitzvah cash until
he ran out. One Asian friend was nicknamed a common racial slur that he
embraced like an incurable disease. Another friend’ s Vietnamese father was
sick, couldn’t afford to see a doctor , spent his mornings hacking  up enough
to atone for the lungs of a dozen smokers. Yet another friend’ s home’ s walls
were covered in unpatched holes (holes from what? A myster y we never
considered), his single Indian mother having given all their money to some
religious sect. He’d later try to commit suicide by driving headfirst into an
oncoming car carrying a family of four. (Somehow , no one died, or pressed
charges.) In the moment, few of us understood our place in the context of
the larger world. Some of us kept our heads down and tried to study our
way out. But a head in a book doesn’ t protect you for long. And if you
thought the kids causing troubl e were off the hook from being picked on,
you had only to peek into their homes. Fathers made sure those sons had no
self-worth, enforced that notion with their fists. The girls seemed pressured
by the ambient violence toward sex, many pregnant by their early teens. We
knew a kid who got a plastic sandwich bag thick with hash for Christmas,
carried and unveiled it proudly . I visited his house once. They owned no
furniture.
Our town paralleled Owase, the population already on the decline. It
peaked in 1970 and would conti nue to fall for the next thirty years. We lost
the factories and the jobs that came with them, much like Owa se has. But
somehow , the ef fect has been so very dif ferent.
Every now and then, in Japan, you get a guy who stalks a woman and
chops her up into pieces in his bathroom, keeps the body parts in buckets of
sand on his balcony . But outside of those crimes of a specific psychopathy ,
most of the crimes of Japan teeter between the banal and the strange.
Rampant underw ear theft (yanked from clotheslines), cheap-b icycle theft,
onigiri  rice ball theft. Sometimes a muri-shinju —double lover suicide. Post-
war literary icon Yukio Mishima wrote stories like “Patriotism,” fetishizing
the double-suici de, romanticizing it, drawing it out in precise detail before
then famously committing his own ritual suicide in the center of Tokyo.
It’s easier to profile a drug dealer than a double-suicidist. In Tokyo I have
been stopped many times, had my bicycle registration confirmed over and
over. Have been forced to open  my bag and empty my pockets, the cops
seeing my face and assuming I might be one of the rare vectors for bringing
weed or MDMA  into society . But here in Owase I don’t know what I’d be
profiled for. Lost émigré, confused, buying too many potato chips at the
convenience store, sleeping alone in that big tatami room at the business
hotel? (Again? Yep, he’s here again. Hey, I’d say to them— it’s the best
room in town! )
As I walk the coast of Kii and pass towns and villages of general poverty ,
I feel how social  systems keep folks afloat, when elsewhere they’d be swept
deep under. An invisible hand is at work and everyone benefits. A single
good kissa holds much sway in the name of sanity and greetings. Yoyū
abounds. Folks maintain their lot, experience dignity . There are no inward
escape routes on the Peninsula, no illicit chemicals with which to
anesthetize the mind. The escapes are outward—toward jobs in the big
cities north of here. Of those still around: men and women with calloused
palms. Their whole lives they’ve fished. Once at scale, out deep. Now for
themselves, slowly , sitting on docks and beaches.


HANKO
Within the smaller towns soon to be gone, barbers and kissas seem often to
be the last shops standing. Sometimes though, you get an outlier , a shop
you’d never expect. Like a hanko  seal shop. There are basically no
signatures here, only “seals,” “chops,” “stamps.” A small, unique, thin,
cylindrical piece of wood or stone or bone with your name etched into one
end. Originally from China (like so much here; writing, art, religion, seals
—all Chinese in origin), first created some 3,500 years ago. Brought to
Japan around 2,000 years ago. Originally just for the emperor  and trusted
vassals, but eventually spreadin g out to the ruling classes, samurai, and
toward the end of the nineteenth century , society at large. Kind of amazing:
a technology fundamentally unchanged for over three millennia.
1784—a farmer ’s field in Fukuoka. Someone found a golden seal, almost
pure gold. Turned out to be the one that the Later Han Dynasty used to
name Japan: the “King of Na” seal. “Na” a loanword for “Wa.” The
kingdom of “Wa.” Something of a pejorative character: 
 , meaning
“submissive” or “dwarfed.” A distant, kinda dinky civilization. A name still
used to this day, still “Wa” but with a different character: 
 —meaning
“harmony” or “peace.” This seal is just a tiny thing, weighing 108 grams,
one inch by one inch square on the bottom, and not even an inch tall. And
yet: This petite package from A.D. 57 bestowed Japan with a formal name.
So much power in such a small object.
Today , you can buy a hanko for the price of a sandwich or the price of a
new BMW. Materials make up the cost difference. Labor is a rounding
error . Almost all official docum ents still require seals, and folks may need
one on the go for any number of strange, bureaucratic, or social reasons.
And so a hanko shop may still be here, in the middle of a fishing village,
alongside a historic trail.
Enter one of these shops—just a counter and a rack of samples —and the
wife of the carver will greet you with a wide-eyed but kind face, will talk
you through, in fine detail, the various carving options, the sizes, the style
of line, the floral flourishes you can have added around the edges of the
less-serious ones. She’ll pull out a bill note and show you the red, circular
government seal on it. Men, she’ll say, are supposed to have seals no
smaller than this. (It turns out men and women are recommended different
sizes.) You’ll choose a wild script—almost illegible, fun, why not—for her
husband to render out your name in a “manly” size. A name he has most
certainly never carved before. You’ll give her the address of the inn you’re
staying at in a few days’  time and pre-pay for shipping and, sure enough,
it’ll be there, the thin black case wrapped in a soft red cloth, and inside that,
a smooth cylinder of bull horn, one end with your name, all squiggles and
loops.




SCALE
I spend the dark and dreary morning at Scale, a kissa run by an old
ironworks guy. The top of his gray head barely comes to my shoulder .
Seventy-three, turned his garage into a kissa twenty years ago. Use your
body when you’re young, he barks, and your mouth when you’re old! Ha
ha! He tells me about the iron he once held and welded, the pungent smell
on his hands, in his hair. He points with seared digits. He has built many
things.
Today’ s “Book of John” notes that coffee arrived via the Dutch to Japan
sometime in the late 1600s, during Tokugawa Tsunayoshi’ s rule. (The “Dog
Shōgun”; he loved animals, John says.) But it didn’ t stick! Made its real
debut when the country was forced open by Commodore Perry’ s “black
ships,” when the coffee tax was set in 1866, and imports began in earnest in
1877.
It was first found in port cities  like Yokohama or Hakodate or Kobe—
places where the “other” most readily fused with Japan. Made  its way to
Ginza in Tokyo around 1911. Osaka, 1912. Banned in 1938 as war efforts
ramped up. Came back in 1947 with so-called G.I. coffee houses on
American occup ying bases. And then the real kissa boom took off in the
sixties.
Scale wasn’ t part of that origi nal boom. And yet in the unexpectedly
flavorful Colombian beans you could trace flavor notes, bitterness, a
caffeine punch back to a dog-loving emperor , some industrious Dutch
traders, the opening of a country , the loss of a war, the occupation by coffee
drinkers, the intermingling of cultures.
I pair the Colombian with a sliced-cheese pizza toast that sizzles. Pizza
toast was the first and only thing I could eat when I arrived in Japan at
nineteen. Me, with a palate forged on SpaghettiOs and Snickers, on
Friendly’ s chicken strips and Wendy’ s milkshakes. That palate  has walked
thousands of kilometers around this country , snacking mainly on pizza
toast.
On the rare days I’d spend with my adoptive father , we ate only fast food.
He never learned to cook more than a salted pan-fried steak. One night, I
finished off six Whoppers. I must have been ten. Who knows of the
gastronomic witchcraft at play on that chilly December eve. But I did it—I
ate ’em. Down they went. A Christmas miracle. After the second one his
eyes grew wide, by the fourth he sat in disbelief, and by the sixth he was
drumming the table, hollering to customers, showing me off like I was the
shop’ s official crown prince—th e Burger King’ s heir. So you can imagine,
when I hit the ground in Japan, sushi was out of the question—sacs of cod
semen, no way .
Pizza toast soothes. Bryan, you’d have dug it. It’s just as it sounds: thick-
cut bread slathered with tomato sauce and slices of processed cheese. Kind
of a bizarro cousin of the fried bologna sandwiches you and I would cook
up. Bologna sometimes Oscar Mayer–thick, but often Polish-deli-thin.
Fleshy punches of mystery meat? Yes, please. Butter in a frying pan on the
electric stove like my grandmo ther taught us, watch those flanks bubble
(because they did bubble, right?  in their weird bologna bubbly  way) up to
crisp umamianc e. Bread so white and soft and cool we’d place it against a
cheek in summer . A few of our beloved banana peppers, yellow mustard,
that same sliced pizza-toast cheese, flop it together and coo in ecstasy on a
stoop facing a grassless yard of dirt.
I had a friend memorialize our sandwich in a drawing:
Outside Scale, the rain is so heavy I decide to take the day off. Not worth
the risk to clamber over Edo-period stones in this stuff. (Mossy , they get
slick as ice when wet.) End up sitting in Scale for hours. Follow up the
pizza toast with cinnamon toast  topped with whipped cream that sits in the
mouth as light as cotton candy . As I write and organize notes, regulars come
in and gab and gibber . It’s as heartening a thing to witness as you can
imagine. I wish we could have  fried up some bologna for them all. They
would have loved it, would have been blown away .
Inside the shop, metal beams, high ceilings, clean welds. Outside, the
concrete bank of a river, rain coming down with a vengeance, battering a
series of potted plants teetering on the lip of a crumbling old wall.
...
Hours in, the customers thin out. The owner asks if I want to see something.
I do, of course, whatever it might be. We run—he’ s faster than he looks—
outside in the rain, down the road, across a driveway and into a barn. It’s
dark and damp and he leads me up steep stairs to an attic where murder or
miracles lurk. Strands of bulbs  encircle the room. He turns on the lights.
Before me: a universe of tiny iron frogs. Each just inches tall. He has
welded hundreds, maybe thousands. Frogs playing tennis and frogs
climbing the Tower of Babel (so he explains). Frogs meditating and frogs
performing judo moves. They’re all so precise. You immediately know what
the frogs are intending to do. Yet he walks me through, one by one, all the
frogs. A lifetime of frogwork. Like this, he takes an iron rose off the wall
and hands it to me. For you, he says. I try to give him money but he laughs,
shakes his head, says he’ s as rich as he’ll ever need to be.
DISP ATCH: ANIMALS
Beneath coal-gray skies, three macaque monkeys perch on the roof of a
home as I desce nd from Magose Pass, just hanging out, sagely observing
the rain-soaked valley .
Another macaque is urinating in the middle of old Funaki Bridge. He
hears me coming, turns around, sticks his tongue out, and hops over the side
into the gorge below . It drops hundreds of feet. I run to the edge but he’s
vanished. Couldn’ t see the rascal anywhere. Still baffled by where he
jumped or if he survived.
...
A few gangly waterbirds—egrets maybe?—taking flight from the misty
woods, one of which lets out a white, strangely elegant stream of guano into
the sacred river below .
...
Dozens of freshwater mountain crabs emer ge from wet forest and river. The
“Book of John” informs me they’re technically called Chiromantes
haematocheir . These Chiromantes haematocheir scuttle before me as I
make my way down a coastal trail. Just after sunrise, as if birthed by the
light of day, there they are, red-clawed, itsy-bitsy things, scurrying
sideways in their funny way. They move like Claymation, at a skittish frame
rate not of this world. But why so worried? What am I going to do to you,
poor mountain crab? Nothing, just chuckle. You are hilariously awkward.
How have your genes made it so far through history? You scurry like dolts
and are oddly shaped. You cannot hide. You scurry and stop against a rock,
looking nothing like a rock. Your inelegance amazes. And why aren’ t you
more terrifying to me? You’re spider -shaped and spider -esque, but evoke
none of the terror of a giant spider . Your utter hopelessness disarms. You
can do no harm , and soon, I imagine, you will be eaten by boars or
monkeys as you shuf fle nowhere in particular .
...
I take a ten-minute break at a pass and it isn’t until I set off that I realize a
mamushi  pit viper as long as my leg has been sunning itself just a few feet
away . Hey bud! I yelp and off it slithers. Snakes, strangely , don’t freak me
out. Only the prospect of being poisoned on a mountain without cell service
freaks me out. Later: a beautiful silver snake sunning itself in the middle of
the path. I tap my pole a few times and it takes of f into the tall grass.
...
If you do get bit, the “Book of John” informs me, don’t worry . Just lie down
for a few days. (A few days?! ) Right there, right in the middl e of the path.
Meditate, stay calm, don’t move . The more you move, the faster the poison
circulates. Call for help or, if you don’t have cell service, just wait for
someone to come along.
...
The dumbest-looking bird runs straight into a bush.
...
Something shaped like a boar or a monkey or a baby bear bolts across the
path and up the mountain about fifty feet in front of me.
...
I’m reminded of Norman Maclean. He wrote “bears bolt straigh t uphill in a
landslide—no animal has such pistons for hindquarters” and I wondered
how many bears had seen the business end of a tsunami, and how much
those hindquarters helped then.
...
I stop to catch my breath just below Mount Tengura. I look up, and a
kamoshika —the Japanese serow , an antelope-like creature, the creepiest and
holiest of forest animals—looks down upon me. Japan has embraced it as a
creature unique to its archipelago, and as such calls it “a living national
treasure of the forest.” It exudes an aura of magic in how fast and sure-
footed it is. They appear in the great films of Miyazaki as prescient sages.
Like a hefty deer, thick in the middle with meat and muscle thanks to its
bovid lineage, a puff of white fluff frames its goat-head and tiny antlers.
This one assessi ng me doesn’ t blink, doesn’ t move, sees deep into my rotten
core, knows all the bad shit I’ve done.
...
The monks in Japan seem to embrace severity and looseness in equal parts.
The marathon monks of Mount Hiei run a hundred marathons in a row
carrying a knife. If for some reason they stop, they must commi t suicide on
the spot. And yet there is also the famous, handsome priest of Kōyasan,
who is a race car driver on the weekends.
The “Book of John” tells me that in the past, euphemisms allowed for
vegetarian Buddhist monks of the Kii mountains to partake in certain meals.
In ancient times, wild boar became botan nabe,  or peony stew .
Deer was rendered as momiji niku,  or maple-leaf meat.
And horse meat—through some creative act of verbal sorcery—became
sakura:  cherry blossoms.
...
Two feisty sisters run the morning’ s kissa with verve. Its walls are all glass.
It overlooks a pond. It’s ridiculo us and wonderful. A duck flies up onto the
balcony and the women go wild— Oh! It’s Octopus! Our beloved, dear
Octopus!  They had named the duck Octopus.

HAMLETS
I walk a moun tain path I haven’t walked before and it turns out to be
everything you hope a path to be—circuitous and intimate with villages and
with the occasional grand view , fully of my ippon-ura school of backroad
walking, soft cedar fronds cushioning each step.
I think about how a walk begins , with balance, in the ear, vestibular , a few
feet above the earth. I don’t know history , but I know science—was always
drawn to and comforted by facts, tested truths uncoupled from the
messiness of life. So I write to John: Endolymph, a potassium-heavy fluid,
oozes inside the so-called bony and membranous labyrinthine canals of the
inner ear. Did you know that? (He did not know that.) It’s inside there—
those crescent-s haped canals—t hat gelatinous bulbs called cupula, attached
to stereocilia, detect the sloshing of our endolymph. The body  moves, the
endolymph splashes, heeds the laws of gravity . The stereocilia bend and
transmit details of the bend—ho w far, how quickly , which orientation—to
the cerebellum, the brain-nugge t secreted at the back of the noggin. The
cerebellum decodes the signals, translates, makes a follow-up microsecond
game plan. Most often of whic h, is simply: Put that next foot down, you
fool. And that’s how a body cover s hundreds of miles of this peninsula,
guided by a finely tuned internal level of bone and flesh and hair .
The system works: the endolym ph sloshes, and I stroll upright. As I do, I
see the “thousand” terraced rice paddies of Maruyama Senmaida. The
visitors are gone and have been gone longer than ever before. Travel gutted
by the virus. Just a few farmers and me, observing this ecosys tem of rice
carved into a place with no flat land. So much effort for such tiny plots.
Onerous positioning on a mountainside, but the mountains are helpful—the
upper reaches contain dams holding back water for flooding the fields in
late spring. Building these dams, the sluices and canals for irrigation,
requires cooperation, a great shared effort. It’s hypothesized that this very
thing—rice farming versus wheat farming—is at the heart of communal
societies going way back. Could it be, such a simple fork? A crop choice
based on environment: wet, humid, rainy , therefore: rice. And with that a
pervasive care throughout generations, a sense of knowing your happiness
and health are intertwingled with those of your neighbor?
Silent morning, abundant sunlight, abundant life. Thinking about this
care. Water in the fields rippling in the wind. Mountains of Kii all around, a
silent sloshing in my head, keeping the sky up and the ground down.



GUNS
From the “Book of John”: Look out for the gunshot, today .
John’ s talking about an old statue, a jizō—one of those bodhisattva
protectors of children and trave lers. The same type of statue that that tour
guide showed us back early in the walk. (There are hundreds of thousands
of jizō around Japan, large and small, alongside roads, next to trees, in
parks, flanking highways, behind temples.)
In autumn on the Peninsula, sometimes around nightfall you hear
gunshots ring out in the distance. Little pops in quick succession. The old
men are hunting  boar. As you walk the mountain paths you see (if not the
beasts themselves) the play of the beasts—where they have dug up roots, or
gnawed on trees, searching for food. You find their little mud pits, their
wallows, where they slept the night before.
Atop Ōbuki Pass sits John’s old stone jizō. Quite big, as far as jizō go. I
look closely and find what the “Book of John” was referencing: a bruise on
the lower side of the statue. John writes, Years ago a hunter mistook it for a
twilight appariti on. Shot it instinctively , though I don’t know why they felt
the need to shoot an apparition. The gun was in hand, loaded, ready . I
suppose it’ s what we do.
TOUGH
From John I learn that in 1201 the poet Fujiwara no Teika wrote, “This
route is very rough and difficult; it is impossible to describe precisely how
tough it is.” In reality , tough, but not indescribably so. It’s just steps in the
end.
Nearby , on a hard stretch of mountain road leading up to Ogumotori (“big
cloud”) Pass, the old route was once lined with inns promising  food and a
hot bath. They fibbed to the walkers though, said there weren’ t inns down
the valley , although there were. But the pilgrims were so traumatized by the
climb that they were happy to believe pretty obvious lies. They weren’ t
lying about having baths, at least.
The inns also laid out cobbles tones to aid the trek. And for this, the
pilgrims were grateful and expressed that gratitude in a little patronage.
Today , just a few deliberately placed stones trace the foundation s of what
once stood. Nothing else of the structures endures. The wood reclaimed—
by man and forest. A strange vestige of one of the last inns to shut can be
seen if you look closely: Alongside an overgrown stone wall sits an
impressive mound of sake bottles. Carried up and consumed, but left behind
when no one was willing to haul them back down.




FISHING POLES
I pass an old woman dressed in a headscarf and farming smock. She asks if
I’ve been fishing . I’m carrying my walking poles over my shou lder and she
thinks they’re fishing poles but then catches her mistake. A flash of
embarrassment about the face. Then: a story . A story about how when she
was in elementary school, second grade, she had to walk over several
mountain passes  to visit her brother who was sick. He was in the hospital,
she said. It was hard, so far, but it was the only way to get there. Up and
over one mountain and then another and another . On the other side,
eventually , was the hospital and in it, her brother .
These are passes I am to walk soon enough.
I ask what happened to him, her brother . Where is he today? She raises
her arms, moves them beside her head as if casting a spell. He became a
fisherman, she says, pointing toward the ocean. He’s still out there, working
even now .
FLATTEN THE MOUNT AIN
Hundreds of years ago, young and old would have climbed these mountains
just like that woman, just like me. They did it because there were no real
roads to speak of. Nothing like we have today , no highways circumscribing
the landmass. Up and over was the only option, using the same routes for
centuries. Today , these paths are no longer a means of commerce—just
nature paths. But in the 1600s, most mountain passes—not just those
especially arduo us ones—would have been lined with teahouses and inns.
You’d have stopped along the way for a few dango  rice balls slathered with
soy sauce, grilled atop beautiful sticks of charcoal.
And when not walking, these long-ago folks used boats—boats galore.
Two hundred years ago, sailing from cove to cove along the Peninsula must
have been a heck of a thing, navigating that wild Kuroshio current, seeing
the jagged landforms disappear and reappear , feeling that infinitude of
ocean ready to suck you out and away toward who-knew-what. From the
“Book of John” I learn that a boatless carpenter around Owase fell in love
with a girl from Mikisato. He sang: If I had my way, I would flatte n that
Mount Yakiyama  with a hoe, and allow her to pass.  (Oh, the lazines s! Even
without the mountain he’s asking her to come to him. Girl’ s lucky the
mountain kept him away .) I walked the Yakiyama route just a few days ago.
Thought about that girl. It’s a hard day’s walk. Treacherous in the rain.
Back then, even  more of an ordeal, an obstacle. Now , a fifteen-minute train
ride through the mountain’ s belly , straight to ill-fated love.

Back then, the waters would have been a panoply of flat-bottomed
wooden boats. Hundreds of people commuting up and down the coast. And
then the other , bigger boats. Fishing boats. What they fished for back then,
they still fished for recently: ise-ebi spiny lobsters and mambo  sunfishes
and sea urchins and other monsters. The industry peaking in the ’80s and
’90s. Then, like so many indus tries, it was offshored. But for a moment
there was somet hing like a string connecting what was, once, so very long
ago, and contemporary times. A string becoming thinner and thinner in
recent years. The oceans are changing. The creatures that live there are
changing. Today , people fish for only some of the things that once were.
Those walking the mountain routes today do so for exerc ise, for the
pleasure of communing with nature. No need to flatten Yakiyama with a
hoe—today we’ve got a highway , a railway , the miracles of modern
mobility . And with that, weaker legs, no lost loves on the other sides of
mountains, a little less poetry laid atop this unfor giving landscape.
GEISHA
Finally some sunshine. The visible world is dry. Ground leeches had come
out with the rains on previous days and it was nice not to think about them.
Not to ask convenience-store clerks to check my head for blood in manic
paranoia. I walk fast. I am walking fast. When I catch up to the only other
hiker I’ve seen in weeks, I say hello. She is geared up, looks like a ranger ,
all beige with a big hat. She both lives in the area and is younger than sixty-
five, which is like finding a snow leopard in these parts. Seven years back,
she moved to the sleepy village of Atashika. (The characters of the town
name mean “new deer” but the “Book of John” chimes in: I love the
etymology of place-names. Atashika could mean the “placing of a new
fishing net” or “new deer.” Since it’s a coastal town, I prefer the former .
Were it in the mountains, “new deer” would be more likely .) Today she
works at the post office part-tim e, and also happens to be a guide for the
trails. As we walk, she points out all sorts of foliage varietals, the names of
which I wouldn’ t remember even if you held a gun to my head like I was
some forest jiz ō.
We exit the mountain path and walk the slope down to a different village,
equally depopulated—the port town of Nigishima. A crescent of rust and
concrete framin g the ocean. I’ve been here many times. We sit at the
wooden gazebo, at the table with a view of the bay next to the fish-
processing plant. I mention how much I love the jabber of the women who
work at the plant. How years ago I ate lunch with them outside , right here,
right at this very table, and couldn’t understand a word they said. Mouths
full of mountain marbles. The thick of the Peninsula down here. They kept
poking me with their fishy fingers and hooting and cackling at whatever I
said like I was some cityslick simpleton, which I was (and am).
They remind me of another woman, Bryan, a woman from our town that
you never met. She was around later in life. A woman who helped my
grandmother when she became  incapable of doing anything on her own.
This woman had thirteen kids—seven boys, all named Arthur or Arty or Art
Jr.—and no teeth, but could gum an apple down to the core. She had a heart
the size of a truck, adored my grandmother like her own, cried as hard as
anyone at the funeral. Though little about her life made sense (and so little
of it had been helped by or looked after by a greater good), I knew she had
a special capacity for love.
I tell all of this to the guide. Yes! I know what you mean, she says. The
ladies’  accents here are so hard to understand, but their words bloom with
affection. When  I arrived, I couldn’ t understand half the people  who came
into the post office. But you pick it up soon enough. And the closer you
listen, the more you realize how much kindness suffuses their chatter . They
truly care.
She tells me that this area had once been filled with geisha. How this
tranquil town we sat in was actually once of some repute for whaling. How
in the nineteenth century they hunted the majestic creatures nearby . Some
meretricious European came in the early twentieth century and set up shop.
Did gangbusters for the whole area. A little coastal boomtown, a blubber -
bloom gold rush. For a few decades, total decadence. Hence the geisha. But
this was all prew ar. Before the whales were driven to near-extin ction. Now ,
perhaps no longer even technically a village, no longer anything in a decade
or two. No matter how hard you squint, never in a billion years can you
imagine a geisha walking aroun d these streets. And if you mention the old
days to anyone who might remember , they get antsy , she says, don’t wanna
chat about it.
...
The “Book of John” is glad to “see” me take a break here (him, tracking the
walk on his GPS map). He regales me with tales of the old Nigishima
festival that took place right across the very bay we faced. A boat race
between Muroko  Shrine and Akoshi Shrine. A festival tangentially whaling-
related—an excuse for building and maintaining skill sets required to row
out to capture the beasts when they would surface in the distan ce. Lots of
men in loincloth s, bathing in the ocean, slow dances on hulls followed by
furious paddling and furious drinking and fights. (Our well-known trifecta:
danger , violence, bonding.) Held for more than three hundred years, the last
one was in 2010. They simply ran out of people to participate.
...
Later , on the way out of town, after saying goodbye to my new friend (she
had to get back to the post office), alone in the woods, I pass an abandoned
stove with delicate inlaid tiling. Look carefully at these mounta in paths and
you realize: The infrastructure for life is still here. The old infrastructure
from when this land was used for small-plot farming, when the plots were
protected from wild boar by shishigaki  stone walls, when these paths were
paths both work ing and worked before the rail line was blasted through the
mountains, before the highway was carved alongside the ocean and
lifestyles changed and this land returned to nature. Before all that, these
mountains purred with human intervention. Not too long ago.
By virtu e of the dry-stone walls, the many plots, the neatly kept paths
between them, you can’t imagin e geisha, Bryan, but you can imagine folks
working, movin g earth, growing crops. Life cycling, though that life is now
gone. Better jobs elsewhere. No reason to toil a patch of mountain when
you can move to the city and make an easy buck. And so it feels
archeological. You, the interlop er. The whole of the view—the stones, the
fallen wood—is covered in moss, electric green, and now trees grow from
the middle of some long-aband oned plots and yet mailbox-sized shrines
here and there are still maintained, some with fresh hinoki like a renewed
Ise, as vigorous  as you’ve ever seen. Who maintains? Someone stooped
with wild eyebrows, hands shaped like old fruit.
CANNED COFFEE
On the way into the Peninsula, the roads can be a bit dire. Sometimes you
hit patches of what I like to call “Pachinko Road.” Stretches of faceless
sprawl lined with those pachinko gambling parlors. There is no single
Pachinko Road,  but many , all part of the greater Pachinko Road that spans
the coun try, the edges of each piece reaching, desiring others, to form an
unbroken unit of pachinko blandness, to envelop all of history and
humanity and replace it with one amoebic, singular box of jangling,
hypnotic, perfectly round metal balls.
The “Book of John” goes deep on pachinko stats for me. The industry
peaked in 1980 at $200 billion USD. Even today , it’s still aroun d 3 percent
of the GDP—3 percent! Pachinko! Some $130 billion USD in revenue.
Unbelievable.
It was develope d in Nagoya right after the war, he writes, the game and
the machines. Plywood, glass, ball bearings—they were in abundance in
that industrial town (which is why it was so heavily bombed in the war; a
place of critical war-machine  industry). Invented by a guy named
Masamura Takeichi. He saw potential in those little bearings. The diameter
and weight of a pachinko ball—1 1mm and 5 grams—hasn’ t changed in
seventy years.
I read all of this under a pine tree next to a highway . There is an allure to
these roads, to this sprawl. You may think sprawl is as sprawl is, anywhere
on this earth of ours, but this is not true. Pass by in a car or on a bike and
you’ll miss it. A vast plain of poured concrete, chain stores, prefab
everything. Dollar General in a different alphabet and currency . But walk
slowly , look at the space between the squat, the faceless, prefabricated gray
buildings—you will notice a tree. Then another . These leftover pines were
planted on a different earth, in a different time. They’re older than us. You
can’t prefab a one-hundred-year -old tree. They are a living question: What
did this bright, blighted stretch of road once look like?
Heavenly cool,  shaded, matsu- pine-lined. Snatches of ocean visible
between the gnarled trunks. An Eden of a road. Small wooden-framed shops
opening with awnings out onto the street selling snacks and drinks and
those common straw sandals. That’ s what it was once like. Every four
kilometers, another ichi-ri-zuka mound, ticking off the distance for
pilgrims. Everyo ne on foot or horse, no carts, no wheels, the exalted carried
in palan quins, lives lived at the pace of saplings. Slow-grow th days and
weeks and months and years.
Today , between  national pharmacies and big-box shops, a few pines
persist. They cast ancient shade. They are invisible until you see them, and
then become remarkable beacon s of life. The sun beats down and the hours
pass, and I stop for a canned coffee from a vending machine, lean against
the rough bark, guzzle that chilled black liquid while staring at a pachinko
parlor . I’m grateful for this old patch of cool, a patch most certa inly used by
other walkers, other pilgrims. I stand and watch the cars pull up, the locals
get out, many of whom are addicts. The automatic doors of the building
open like jaws: white noise, tobacco smoke, the scream of a billion ball
bearings and jackpots. Those people enter and the doors close and, for the
briefest of moments: total silence like a silk cloth falls over the landscape.
VENDING
Vending machin es are everywhere here. You’ll find them in the most remote
of locations, on the tops of mountains, down an alley , behind a burnt-out
shack: There one is. Never vandalized (I mean, we would have gleefully
destroyed a few but the kids here don’t have that impulse—once again, the
power of yoy ū?), always on, always ready with sweet goodness.
The greatest vending machine I ever found was in the middle of a rice
field decades back. During that first year in Japan, I spent “sprin g” break (it
seemed to land more at the tail end of winter than spring) hitch hiking from
Tokyo to Fukuoka. My homestay family didn’ t even bat an eye when I told
them what I was going to do. Good luck! the mom yelled without turning
around from the TV.
February , snow in the air, somewhere in Gifu, a stranger picked me up
and offered me a place to crash. We ate CoCoIchi curry together . We started
with beer. Drunk before even leaving the shop. We did “karate” in the
parking lot and drove back to his nearby home. And there we finished a
bottle of Jack in his filthy shoebox apartment. I had just turned twenty . I
was barely out of our town. It was around this time I felt more acutely the
scarcity from which we came, how little we knew about the world or how it
worked. The feeling hit me with the full force of the abundance I felt
around me in Japan—of such an elevated baseline of wealth and health.
Even this guy’s shoebox apart ment was built on ambient abundance: It
worked, it was cheap, it was safe (whether he cleaned it or not was a
separate issue). From glimpsing that deficit—between myself and this new
world I was starting to inhabit—a yawning expanse of emptiness was
revealed. The sort of emptiness only revealed when you leave the smallness
of your hometown, see the greater world, feel your own void amplified in
the abundance of others. That emptiness threw me for a loop, scared the shit
out of me. Fillin g it with alcohol  came as easy as anything. And damn could
I drink. Ten, fifteen shots. No problem. After the third or fourth drink
everything changed, some unknown gene activated, the emptiness was gone
and all the world existed for one thing only: more drink.
Like this, I drank myself into the ground for nearly a decade because I
saw no other way. No guides. No archetypes. More people feel this way
than you may think. My empathy for them is boundless. And so at the start
of that cursed decade, in some filthy countryside apartment, music was
played with a stranger on toy instruments, poison-coated throa ts, until we
passed out, legs under a heated table. Some hours later I woke, terrified, in
pain, like my head was about to split. Water. I needed water . Didn’ t know
where I was. Couldn’ t remembe r how I had arrived. Didn’ t think to suckle
the tap. Opened the rusted apart ment door to a rush of winter -night air and
saw stars rainin g down on the dormant rice fields. That air was bountiful
life. I inhaled like I had just surfaced from a shipwreck. The apartment
block nothing more than a conc rete bunker in the middle of the paddies. It
stood alone. From afar, looked  like a nuclear spill containment vessel. I
stood on the fourth floor . In the distance: a clear glow , like Mars  descended,
my savior . Transfixed, I walked  barefoot across the frosted, tilled earth, to
the machine. In my pocket I had the precise amount of change needed to get
a sports drink. I nearly wept.
THAT FLOA TING FEELING
The body acclimates, grows strong. At a certain point on a long walk, the
kind of walk where you clock twenty or thirty or forty kilometer s a day, day
after day—and you get into that rhythm of waking, walking, working,
sleeping—you realize that the body is just a machine. You feed it and it
turns that feed into steps. The cerebellum does its thing.
Today I have seven mountain passes to get over and am trying to get to
my inn by sunset. So although I didn’ t intend it to be a race, the day’s
become a race of necessity .
Up and down the mountains, past abandoned baseball fields. Fields
overgrown with wild wheat, old men walking loops around the diamond,
making limp the uncut grass. Through fishing villages, past long-since-
shuttered cafés and hardware stores. I float with a total and absolute
lightness of being, an orangutan ballerina, arboreal and oddly shaped, arms
and poles as one, glissading up and down, up and down, yellin g, HELLO!
and GOOD LUCK! and SORR Y FOR GOING SO QUICKL Y BUT  I’VE
GOT  TO BEA T THE SUN! to the few locals I pass. They gasp: Look at him
go!
I feel certain that I could do this forever—this swinging down and pulling
myself up mountains. This moving, this gaining ground. There was no
reason to stop, sunset be damned. The meat machine my consciousness
inhabits feels well-oiled, irrepressible, and unyielding to these puny
mountains.
Bryan, you and I ran. We ran until our lungs seared, raced each other both
formally and informally . You always won, until that one time you didn’ t
(sorry) and I made the team (gah) and you got cut and your father looked at
me like I had accidentally killed your dog. A look seared into the folds of
my brain. A shameful branding. He made us run sprints in the yard. All of
which I lost, of course. (Pulling back, slowing down, wanting so badly for
that look to be reversed but knowing even then it would be with me
forever .) He wanted me to know with no uncertainty that you had the
physical abilitie s, not me. I was to stick to the books. I didn’ t have teenage
sisters, both pregnant. I wasn’ t to take away your few gifts.
Between us, I know we didn’ t care. You’d shake your head. Forget my
dad, man. Not that we didn’ t love him—we did. He was bearded like Zeus
and burly. His scars seemed to shimmer like flesh freshly pressed onto a
stovetop. They captivated us, though we only ever dared glance at them
from the corners of our eyes. Unmentionable, yet mesmeric. He had
survived the Vietnam war, survived his motorcycle crash. Those scars,
proof enough of transcendence for us.
And from  this cheating of death, he seemed imbued with more height and
strength than any other father . He played a monthly softball game with the
postal team. Smashed line drives, snatched those pop flies from  the air like
picking apples off a tree. Drove us there and back to watch —beer and
tobacco on his breath—as we sat in the bed of his truck holding  our dented
and rusted Huffy BMX bikes, hollering to each other beneath  that amber
summer sky. There seemed to be no rules, certainly no seatbelts. I loved
those summer nights with everything I had. My adoptive father was
elsewhere, and my mom’ s boyfriends would come and go, so this brawny
mailman was something of a constant and held more sway over me than I
think he ever imagined. I never beat you in a race again, did I?
But in the moun tains of Kii, sprinting against sunset, against only myself,
I can push hard, needn’ t hold back for anyone. Some thirty years later I am
stronger than ever. Stronger than anyone else on these mountains. Today ,
I’m as old as your dad was back  then, with my own lesser , spotty beard. On
days like these, an impulse to go on forever beats inside my chest. It’s
impossible to grow tired. These  legs will never give out. They’ll haul this
pack over a hundred more passes. To walk like this is the best way I know
to show gratitude for the healt h and privilege authorizing this primitive
dance, permittin g this day of walking and all other days, too. A tribute to
those summer nights we shared.
...
In the distance I hear a train, the Nanki Express. A train I’ll ride when the
walk is done. An act that feels  distant and abstract in the moment, like
death. Sure, it’ll come, but damn ed if I believe it. It feels as if all the truth in
the whole wide world was here in this forest, just over the next pass, certain
to be found on the walk. Everything else beyond the Peninsula is a shadow ,
a sham, a performance. From the train I knew I’d sneak peeks of the truth of
this walk in reverse. A pass that takes an hour by foot flashing by in a blink.
Like watching a film spooled up at a thousand frames per second. The slow
rhythm of the walk undone, replaced with a rapid clack. The mountains
skipped altogeth er. Compressed  air in tunnels. You and I flew through the
forest side by side; mid-run nothing mattered and we were gone , out of that
town, free from authority , safe, fully inhabiting a world of our own. Scales
of observation, two young boys with searing lungs, crudely feeling out our
paired truth, moving as fast as those legs of ours would take us.
KII-KA TSUURA
In Kii-K atsuura, encouraged by the cool evening breeze, you can touch
almost every street on foot given an hour or two. Murals of whales adorn
the concrete walls around the docks, raw dolphin is served on common
china. Not that I ate it, but I saw it advertised in windows, on menus, the
general area having a long and sordid history of slaughtering dolphins. But I
was just noticing, passing through without judgment. (Though I know that
noticing itself is a form of judgment.)
The “Book of John” informs  me that MacArthur revitalized whale
consumption post-war . Was the main protein source for elementary-school
lunches. Tells me the older generations have a nostalgia for the taste, the
texture, the funktified chewiness.
I walk the streets and people who eat things I don’t eat say hello with ease
and the night’ s inn has given me a fine room facing the docks. Up early ,
from my open window , I watch two-person fishing boats slide out into the
mirror -still bay at daybreak.

COPPER
I know you won’ t believe it, they said, but hand to heart, Itaya had three
movie theaters. Said that’s how booming it had been back then. Now , ain’t
got no theaters. No kids. Once, long ago, they said, we found a fine vein of
copper and mined it dry . Sucked it straight out the earth.
Today , no more copper . But that old metal, pulled from the ground by
these Peninsula hands, it lives on around the world in many things, the
walls of many homes.
...
Decades after those theaters opened, the Isewan Typhoon stripped parts of
the Peninsula of its trees. Just behind Asuka Shrine, beneath  the newly
denuded land, the villagers investigated. They unearthed a host of religious
objects: more than 190 kakebotoke —hanging tablets adorned with symbolic
carvings—dating back to 300 B.C. Older than the shrine itself, offerings to
kami to protect crops. Objects considered hard proof of certain Peninsula
myths.
...
Nearby , at Hananoiwa Shrine, a million years ago, Izanami gave birth to her
son, Kagutsuchi , the god of fire, dying in the process. Today , a long braided
rope connects the shrine’ s object of worship—a towering rock face with a
gaping hole—to the earth. A great pine once stood between the ocean and
the gaping hole, around the top of which the rope was wound. Today , a thin
cement tower has replaced the tree. Dressed in his whites, the shrine’ s priest
motions with his hand for me to follow . At the base of the tower is a grate.
You can climb in there, he whispers. You can wiggle your little self all the
way up to the top.


ONE QUICK W ALK
Bryan, here’s something I never told you: My grandfather used to invite me
on walk s around the neighborhood. Come, walk with me, he’d say as he put
on his overcoat and hat. I alway s declined, though in my heart I wanted to
join. From my second-floor bedroom window , I’d peek out and watch him
stroll with measured elegance down the driveway , turn the corner ,
disappear . And I’d immediately feel bad about having said no. How simple,
I thought, how simple it would be just to walk next to Pop. But I also
thought about the other kids. I thought about being seen. I thought about
what that might mean, me walk ing with my grandfather . Stupid, yes. But
there it was: this fear, keeping me from doing something so simple, from
giving him this kindness.
Nearly twenty years later, I had built a life in Japan, and came back to
visit. We went to our local steak  place, the place we always went for special
occasions (my visiting being a big one), and ate our well-done—forever
well-done—leathery steaks. On the car ride home, I sat in the back next to
him and held his hand. A hand I should have held much earlier. Later , at
home, I heard him tell my mom, Craig held my hand. He was crying. This
dumb thing, this holding of an old man’ s hand. I knew he would soon be
gone (and he was).
THE BOA T
The Peninsula begins to eat itself in spring, and by summer is lost within its
own terrible fecundity . Without human touch, most old paths would
disappear within  a few years or become, at least, hidden. Boar and deer
would keep their own secret routes fresh, but the others would be lost.
I pass by my favorite boat again. I can’t help but smile. Why do I adore
this dumb thing so much? It hasn’ t touched water in decades. An object in
the midd le of nowhere, now devoid of purpose, along the coast beside a
skinny dirt path. It lies close to the village of Hadasu, a village with few
inhabitants, embedded in an ocean-facing cliff, stairs connectin g small rice
plots and homes.
The day I first saw the boat had been long and hot. This was years ago. I
turned a corner and ducked below some underwear—gray and worn with
stories to tell—drying on a line in someone’ s backyard. There it lay, like a
glitched renderi ng: the boat. Subsumed by earth, like a half-bu ried coffin,
topmost edge of the wooden hull describing what it used to be, otherwise
filled with dirt and grass, like earth itself rose up and half-ingested the
thing.
It reminds me of the suicide boats the old priests used to head out on just
off this very coast. They called it fudaraku tokai —“voyage to the southern
Buddhist paradi se.” The “Book of John” explains it as a simple  thing: The
priests would enter a little shelter built on a tiny wooden boat and be nailed
in. A single sail, no oars, no windows, taken by the current—an extreme
form of worship  wherein they hoped to arrive at that southern paradise, the
home of the Bodhisattva of Compassion.
How many times did this happ en? Not many . Maybe twenty or thirty
times over a thousand years, but you don’t need many suicide  boats to be
remembered. John thinks it was pragmatic—old priests about to die
anyway , why not go out with a bang? Make your temple famous. Increase
the alms from parishioners.
This boat, not a suicide boat (you can see an example of one of those
down near Nachi Falls), just a boring little boat. But a boat that once pulled
life from  the water . I’ve watche d it over time, passed it many times. Each
time the ground  rises a little more and the boat sinks in equal measure, and
here it was today , once again.
Beyond suicides , it never fails to bring to mind dust around ankles, dust
on the body (our old friend Bash ō), volcanic-dusted food stalls in Pompeii.
Annie Dillard wrote about dust, once, and I can’t help but think of her
passage: “Earth sifts over things. If you stay still, earth buries you, ready or
not.”
What dust covers this boat? The kind of dust drummed up from the ocean,
by a coastal breeze. Dust with the skin and bone of those priests, whales,
dolphins, pilgrim s. Dust as old as the earth itself. It eats the boat: dust.
Subsumes it. The boat lies next to the path disturbing an otherw ise flat plot,
perhaps once a garden or small field, now empty save for a bare tree. To the
left, a stone-walled stream, rubber drainage tube. Around it all a thin wire
fence keeping us walkers out. The footprint of Kōbō Daishi lies just a few
miles south. Twenty more years, no more boat, nothing but grass, all the
dust you could want, ready or not.

PARKINSONS
Hope. The cloud less sky and generous sunlight fills me with hope. I walk
one pass and then another and another and another along the Hongū-dō—
the two-day route connecting Kumano City and Hong ū. I eat an egg
sandwich in the shade of someone’ s stoop. I throw chocolate-covered
cranberries up into the air and catch them in my mouth. I whistle a made-up
1950s tune at an obnoxious volume and imagine Bing Crosby crooning it in
black-and-white. And eventually I amble back down from the mountains to
the ocean for a rice pilaf filled with tiny shrimp. My seat faces the sea and
the famous “Shishiiwa”—a rock that is said to look like a lion’ s head.
The kissa owner exhibits signs of early Parkinson’ s disease. I had watched
my grandmother  struggle with it during the last twelve years of her life. The
tells are often clear once you know what to look for. Like learning a new
word, suddenly it is everywhere. Toward the end, the disease  curled my
grandmother into herself, turned  her hands into iron fists so tightly wrapped
that her thumbs broke, had to be amputated.
When I was a child, my mother was always nearby , ready to dole out hugs
and help me with homework, but also with her head in a book , every free
moment spent studying to be an elementary-school teacher . She showed me
what diligent focus looks like, but it was my grandmother who ran the
home, made the operation sing. Cooking, picking tomatoes from our tiny
patch, vacuumin g, organizing our bills. Kept the house and our lives in
order , force-fed  Peppermint Patties to all of my friends (you especially ,
Bryan). Woke me up with tears and pleas—PLEASE CRAIGY , PLEASE
GET  UP—when I refused to rise on certain school-day mornings. Once, on
a trip home from college, I went  to help her out of her chair , gingerly placed
my arm around hers and lifted. Snap. She screwed up her face but wouldn’ t
let on that I had just broken her humerus. Didn’ t want me to feel bad. Still
to this day one of the truest acts of love I’ve witnessed. She held that pain in
for week s, finally “caught” sometime later when a doctor asked , When the
heck did this happen? I knew how these things could end.
The kissa owner fidgets. A cup of coffee quivers on its saucer as she
carries it across the room. She repeats gestures as she puts the plate of pilaf
on my table: placing and pullin g back and placing again, as if to check or
double-check the synaptic misfirings that are happening, the disconnects
between her intention of posit ioning one object against another and the
sharded reality and tenuousness of her delivery . Internal systems  failure. It’s
crushing, but it also feels nice to be reminded of my grandm other , who
made sure we were all okay , served a mean fried bologna, and suffered, I’m
sure, in her own many ways, ways I’ll never know or understand.
The owner tells me she never intended to own the place. But the guy she
married turned out to be a nudn ik, couldn’ t hold a job, and so she entered
the kissa  game.  Took over this shop from someone else thirty  years ago.
That husband was now long gone, but she keeps at it, loves the work, loves
the view . She is buoyant and chatty and her arms and legs have the delicacy
of a finely made  marionette, shaking as if animated by the beating heart of
some puppeteer above.
The shop is supposed to close at five and I notice that it’s five fifteen, so I
shut my mouth and pay and thank her. I walk back to my inn along the
shore under the last of the day’s light. The waves break and break some
more, like how a disease overtakes the body , or how a peninsul a consumes
itself, collapses , starts again. Given enough time, a ceasele ssly bashed
seaside mountain briefly becomes a lion.

KŌYA FIRE
Do you remember the lighters— cheap, plastic, pocketed at gas stations?
How we spread them throughout the landscape of our childhood ? Hid them
in tree hollows, in metal boxes buried behind that barn? (Are they still
there? They must be.) I know now what we didn’ t know then: that to have
fire nearby was to have power . A little spark, a tiny flame with the potential
to burn it all down.
As I walk Kii, I feel the pulsing  energy of Kōyasan and its many temples
nestled in the heart of the Peninsula—as if my skull was full of iron filings
and Kōyasan was magnetized true north. It’s pretty tough to access, even
today . The work to have bushwh acked through the subtropical growth 1,200
years ago, to have climbed these endless peaks, and then to have
constructed hundreds of temple s can only be defined as mania, a deep-
seated piety, a truly committed faith that this spot, this very spot, was the
one and only on which to build a site of total worship.
The “Book of John” tells me Kōyasan is an 800-meter -high basin
surrounded by eight peaks—a lotus plant in stone. He tells me it is the most
sacred Buddhist  site in Japan. That 117 temples are still around today ,
though that’s way down from the peak. The graveyard, he tells me, contains
the graves of over 60 percent of feudal lords from the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries. The first and second Shōguns—T okugawa Ieyasu and
his son Hidetada —have graves here. That’ s how much mindshare this place
held, a place known and revered throughout the land. A kind of grave
Valhalla. Women  were banned, John says, from the most holy of its sites, its
most inner areas, until 1872, when a twenty-one-year -old named Ichino
Kayano ignored  the rules and just up and started living there. Everyone was
upset, of course , but she held her ground, and now anyone can go almost
anywhere around the site.
Today , the circular path restricting female access to around the perimeter
remains: It’s called the Nyonin-michi . It’s a good route if you find yourself
up at the top looking for a hike to occupy a few days.
For years I spent New Year’s Eve up there, inside the Nyonin-michi,
among the temp les and the graves. It soothed to be away from the crowds of
the cities, the parties, the drinking. Toward the end of my twenties I began
to engineer more and more things into my life that deliberately took me
away from alcohol. I’d hike up this mountain on December 30th or 31st,
sleep in a small tatami-mat room for monks, eat simple meals of soup and
rice and those fresh mountain vegetables, observe the fire ceremonies from
afar.
As snow  would fall on the last day of the year, there before me: a massive
torch carried on the shoulders of a dozen men in indigo robes, circular
forms on their backs, unlit paths, a few dozen spectators tripping alongside,
the odd person falling into one of many ditches, ditches that seemed to be
everywhere. All of us supernumerary to the glow . Those cloudy late-
December nights dark as heck, starless, no light save that barely controlled
burning held by men.

The mountain priests are voluble when poked. A so-called Shinto-
Buddhist syncretic ceremony , they’d say, this burning thing. Held on to
despite those nineteenth-century Meiji-era edicts demanding tradition be
broken, banning ceremonies just like this. Edicts meant to keep Shinto
“pure,” casting aside any mixing-in of Buddhism. For most of Japan’ s
history , Buddhism and Shinto intermingled with admirable fluency , temples
and shrines right next to each other, sharing gods and prayers. But once the
military govern ment—the Shōgunate—was overthrown by the Imperial
Court and Meiji government at the end of the nineteenth century , they
needed to hammer home the origin myth of Japan, the purity of its people.
Japan was different, special. Anything from the outside wasn’ t “real” Japan.
(A weird notion considering so much in Japan has been borrowed from
China and Korea—writing systems, pottery technology , language, DNA—
but maybe that’s why they were so sensitive: Shinto is one of the few
outright native creations.) Buddh ism wasn’ t explicitly banned, but as a holy
place you had to choose—shrine or temple, Shinto or Buddhist. You
couldn’ t have both. The Kii Peninsula was far enough away to ignore these
federal mandates. In part, that’s why this spit of land is today so culturally
valuable, why the UNESCO World Heritage listing was granted:
Syncretism between two spiritual frameworks is a rarity worth celebrating.
And, anyway , the priests told me, it wasn’ t ever impure, that intermingling,
it was always harmonious. Remarkably without compromise or strife. A
ceremony like this is one of grace and clarity and great danger —a forcing
function to train one’s attentio n through the use of fire—where the true
form of Buddha temporarily becomes a Shinto god. Having the yoyū of
mind to allow for another ’s god in your home—a notion today more
important than ever .
If the outdoor fire ceremonies seem nuts (huge flames, dark paths, a
profusion of possible injuries), the indoor fire ceremonies are nuts squared.
Enacted almost daily in tiny halls—low ceilings, shuttered windows—the
priests would perform goma-taki  morning rituals as they had for centuries.
Only recently were sensible laws passed demanding adequate ventilation.
I’ve been to the old ceremoni es—covered in smoke, filled with smoke,
purified by smoke. Beautiful movements of the hands of the priests as they
stoke the flames , wave prayers above them, burn the tablets written with the
pains and desires of those in attendance. Movements from another time. But
the rate of lung cancer among the priests was too high to ignore.
With all these fire ceremonies, you’d think there’d be uncontrolled fires,
destructive fires, and there were. Important structures are often replicated
(like, entire backups built nearb y) so if anything happens, the prayers can
continue uninterrupted.
Even so, out in the cold on New Year’s Eve, the huge torch burns. The
crowd: mostly men, fathers and sons. Men who look on with suspicion and
fear and awe at the great burning thing. Men with glasses cast orange, firelit
faces, men with bowed heads, Rembrandt colors. No worries about
ventilation beneath the stars. I am with the crowd but watch it alone. Feel
apart from it all. (A feeling that comforts.) A single point witnessing the
sublime, the old. Flame aloft, the ceremony creates security and abundance
through danger . An impulse you and I understood well.
Nearby , Hōjū-in Temple, a backup for Kong ōbu-ji, the most important
temple up here. The hint of a torii gate in the shadows. Sparks in the air,
snow on the ground.
Snow still falling had been falling all night.

DEET
Before heading out I spray a generous amount of bug repellant up and down
myself and suddenly realize that the entirety of our childhood was a Time of
DEET . With the tangy punch of the chemicals I’m back in the woods, eight
years old, at the trailer park of my mom’ s boyfriend, that truck driver who
shared a name with a famous cartoonist. We ate canned beans and Fruit
Roll-Ups. The air was filled with the scent of charcoal and burnt wood. You
never came. Maybe I was too embarrassed. Or my mom was. For whatever
reason, this section of my life was cordoned off. Everyone in the woods in
ratty T-shirts and jean shorts. I played with his kids, kids you never met. For
lack of toys and oversight our games were simple and dangerous, like
breaking rocks. Just hold that down, his two dusty-faced children said, my
hand around a small rock atop the smash-slab. Don’ t worry , they said,
lifting a rock the size of their skulls. And then: an explosion of pain lighting
up the whole trailer park. That must have been the same summ er I tasted
beer for the first time, the boyfriend giving me a sip as a joke or maybe in
an attempt to shut me up, to quit my screaming about my finger, and me,
spitting it out in shock, wonderi ng how a person could drink a whole can of
that stuf f.
Later , surrounded by old-growth cedars, passing moss-covered graves of
fallen pilgrims, I climb Ōgumotori-goe and try to figure out how old my
mom and her boyfriend would have been. Almost a decade younger than me
in the moment.  Middle finger , left hand—never been perfectly straight
since. The great amusement of that summer was showing it off, the splinted
digit. I remembe r flashing it at your mom, all of us laughing as I said, This
one, definitely this one—and gave her the bird.

COBAL T
Lying down in Hong ū for the night, I open the “Book of John” and it just
says: Remember Cobalt.
An evening, years ago. John and I had walked the few hours from Hong ū
to the tiny lumber village of Totsukawa.
Along the Kohechi route, Totsukawa is a mountain crook of a village with
a couple onsens, a few bars, and not much else. A place called Cobalt had
been around for decades. A so-called sunakku  or “snack bar.” Basically , a
nighttime kissa.  Cobalt: great name. I’d seen it a dozen times on a dozen
other walks and each time thought about popping in in the same way you
might contempl ate a shave at a street stall in India—inquis itively , but
without the ener gy or guts to go all the way .
Now , with John, it was easy to go in. We were zonked from a big day of
walking, yes, but also curious. Three other customers sat at Cobalt’ s short
counter . John sat next to a shriveled, surly-looking fellow on the end of the
bar, and I sat next to John, and the other two customers were next to me,
and just like that there was no more counter to sit at.
Behind the bar, the Mama preened with her blue mascara and bouffant
perm.
You know , she said—slurring her words a little and making eye contact
that would turn the pope red—men are the most beautifu l creatures.
Vaaaaastly  more beautiful than women.
Nobody moved.
Women must wear makeup. Men— oh, if men wore makeup it would be
the end of times, their beauty is too great!
The Mama continued in this vein. A Korean soap opera silently played on
the overhead television and the two guys next to me chatted between
themselves.
After some time I noticed that John—who is objectively large as humans
go, over six feet tall, a hundred kilos give or take, very obviously not
Japanese—and the tiny old man at the end of the counter were deep in
discussion. The Effect was in play. The little dude, who couldn’ t have been
more than a third the volume of John, was now stroking John’ s arm, holding
it up to the light like a ham, wistful, declaring to the bar, Look at this
beautiful hair! Oh, how I wish my arms were hairy like this!
He was a retired logger . Late eighties. Wife had passed a decade back.
Born and raised  on the Peninsula, just down the road, he had worked his
entire life in the mountains, refused to live with any of his many  children or
grandchildren. Though he lives alone, they keep a close eye on him, and
allow this one indulgence: Patro nize Cobalt each and every day as long as
he’s home and calls before nine.
The clock in the corner of the TV ticked over to 20:55. On cue, the old
man bolted up and began to hold forth: I have never spoken with a foreigner
before tonight. (Truly?! I hear you ask, and yes, probably , truly.) And—he
continued, now steadying himself against the bar—I used to think they were
ferociously scary , frightening things.
Then, softly , But … now I see—that’ s not true.
And with that he leaned over and cradled John’ s head with his shaking
hands and gently placed his lips upon John’ s cheek.
Goodnight, good night, he said as he shuffled off to make his call, to keep
his promise, to tell his kids about the lovely ham he got to stroke.
HONG Ū
After spending a night in a guesthouse run by a quiet mountaineer—a
volunteer for the local rescue  service, a guy who is fastidious in his
cleanliness, and mercifully serve s coffee and toast and eggs for breakfast—I
take a full day off in Hong ū. I sit on the grounds of Ōyu-no-hara with an
egg sandwich and a bottle of green tea. Sit right where that calamity of
1889 happened, where the Grand Shrine of Hong ū once stood and then was
washed away . Today it’s still considered a sacred space, a power spot, home
to eight deities, but kept mostly  empty , covered in grass like a park, a holy
park, one where you shouldn’ t play Frisbee or walk your dog. (But an
impromptu egg sandwich is fine.)
Through a thin strand of trees I spot the mighty Kumano River. The
“Book of John” tells us: Traveling upstream against the current  from major
shrine to major shrine, from Shingu to Hong ū, Heian- period court noble
Fujiwara no Munetada notes in his diary: Yelling out in tremendous voices,
the boatmen thrust their oars into the dark waters and push with all their
might. Their bodies fall nearly level with the hull.
This—Hong ū—is where many routes on the Peninsula conver ge. The
beating heart of Kumano and Kii. Hong ū. A place wholly venerated: the
river for providing water for rice, the mountains for being the source of the
river, and the trees and plants for purifying that water en route to hidden
aquifers. Even the riverbank is an object of worship. The deities of Kumano
descended into an oak tree on this sandbar in the form of three moons. So
declares the legend connecting  back to the founding of Kumano Hong ū
Grand Shrine in 68 B.C.
Legends, gods, an oak tree! Our backyards—oaks and pines. For as much
time as we spent up in the branches of the oaks, picking up the acorns of the
oaks (hood-whistles against our lips), I don’t think we ever imagined gods
descending into them as astral objects. If these  were the stories we heard on
Sunday at mass—would they have made us believe?
Bryan, I’ve explained the differences between Shinto and Buddhism, but
perhaps the “simplest” way to visually differentiate is that shrin es have torii
gates: markers between the secular and spiritual. And the biggest in the
world is right next to me, right at the entrance to Oyu-no-hara.  The “Book
of John”  serves up a heaping plate of facts: 33.9 meters tall and 42 meters
wide—biggest in the world. Go smack its side: steel. 172 tons. Six months
to make. Six months to assemble. This version is relatively new,
reconstructed in the year 2000. (As we’ve seen at Ise, Japan is at ease with
reconstructions.) The oldest form of a torii gate is two wooden  posts with
straw rope strung between them. Under influence from China they became
more complicated. The largest wooden  torii is at Miyajima Island, near
Hiroshima.
To give you a glimpse into the absurdity of my life, of how far I’ve
traveled from our town, I once took Jeff Bezos (he had been knocked down
a rung to the world’ s second-richest human at the time) on a little walk
around these parts (don’ t ask; long story). As we approached the grand torii,
I relayed the facts, told him it was the biggest in the world, and he turned to
me with the widest eyes I’ve ever seen and said in his singular Jeff Voice:
LET’S BUILD A BIGGER ONE.
It was near this mega torii of Hong ū, the one Jeff Bezos wants to
dethrone, that the eleventh-century mid-Heian period female poet Izumi
Shikibu wrote the following on pilgrimage:
Beneath unclear skies
My body obscur ed by drifting clouds
I am saddened that my monthly obstruction has begun
In a dream that night, a god of Kumano came to her and said: How could
the god who mingles with the dust suffer because of your monthly
obstruction? Even deities suffer from impurities so who am I to judge who
can and cannot worship?
This legend codified the female-inclusive nature of Hong ū and the
Kumano area. Even though some parts of the mountains, and Kōyasan’ s
inner sanctum, remained off-lim its to women, much of Kumano Kodō was
open and welcoming.
Nearby , on the other side of the visible mountains, over Dainichi-goe
Pass, is Yunomine Onsen, with “Tsuboyu,” its World Heritage bath. A
World Heritage bath you can actually slip into, unlike the Rom an baths in
Bath (off-limits  to bathers). Tsuboyu is impressively banal—a  nook in a
rock on the side of a river. The nook burbles with scorching milky blue-
white hot-spring  waters. You gotta stir the waters up good with a giant
wooden spatula to lower the temperature a few degrees, lest your dunk turn
the bath into soup. In fact, the water comes out of the ground so hot that the
whole river steams. Locals cook eggs in it—the river. Only takes thirteen
minutes. Above the nook they’v e built (and rebuilt as it gets washed away
in storm s) a wooden structure for privacy . In April, fathers enter the bath
and dunk their two-year -old sons, carrying them then on their shoulders up
over the pass, over to where I sit, these holy grounds, and then up to Hong ū
Grand itself. The “Book of John ” tells me that once dipped, those sons are
“imbued with the gods of Kumano.” Can’ t let their feet touch the ground
until they pass that giant gate, until they get to the safe space of the shrine.
How does this change a fathe r? How does it make a son feel, to be
whisked over a mountain on strong shoulders? I refuse to believe these
aren’ t important acts, maybe the most important. Myth used well—myth
translated into the joyful, the ridiculous, the meaningful.
I sit basking in the sunlight atop grass that is as much a god as anything I
can see. Above, the crows circle and caw as they have for millennia.
IMMUT ABLE STUFF
As I walk, Kum ano deities manifest physically—the mighty Kumano River ,
Nachi Falls, the Gotobiki Iwa rock in Shingu, and more.
When I imagine the Peninsula as a god itself, I see a creature for whom
it’s as easy to summon a thing into being as it is for us to say a word. The
Peninsula desire s a shack and by that desire—of earth and rock and worm
and leech—a shack manifests. The Peninsula desires an abandoned barn,
and there it is, as it always has been, for as long as the Peninsula wants it to
be.
When I was a kid, the whole world felt preordained, immutable.
Everything about the old town simply was, always had been, and always
would be. There was no old town without you, Bryan. Of course you were
there. Of course  we met. This was the way it was meant to happen. What
agency did we have? Minute by minute, it felt like had all the autonomy in
the world. But over the long arc of our childhood? Almost none god
airplane-engine factories consecrated it all, and thus from the tobacco fields
rose.

GYŪBA
Deep in the forest on Hashiori Pass sits a Meiji-era stone statue dubbed
“Gyūba Dōji.” I consult the “Book of John”: It depicts the young Emperor
Kazan straddling a horse and a cow, the first emperor to make the imperial
pilgrimage to the Peninsula. Gyūba —“cow horse.” Dōji—“young child.” I
have a theory , John writes:
This was the first emperor to take this pilgrimage, way back in the late
tenth century . The young emperor riding both animals becomes a
Buddhist triad: Kazan as Amidha, flanked by two protective
Bodhisattvas. Or maybe the idea is that one should approach the
pilgrimage slow ly, at the pace of a cow, and leave with brisk  vitality ,
like that of a horse.
Slowly or quick ly, on a June afternoon not so many years ago, someone
noticed that the head of the statu e—the emperor ’s noggin—had been sliced
off. Newspaper accounts relay that some three hundred locals searched in
vain. Searched the mountains and searched the shops—pawn and otherwise
—as far off as Osaka and Kyoto and Kobe. Searched for secondhand
hucksters. And then some other scoundrel, maybe even the same one, went
and stole a patch of beloved moss over near Koguchi—just cut it from an
ancient rock and lifted it like sod, thick as a couple sandwiches, a meter
square—tried to barter it as World Heritage goods to various disreputable
horticulturists. It was a bit of a wild time, all this small-stakes thievery in a
place with almo st no crime, small or large. Today , I walk past that mossy
rock. It’s coming back, the moss. Not quite like it used to be, but leave a
rock in a wet forest long enough, and it will do what it wants to do. I gently
pet it, wonder how long it will take to return to its former splendor .

About that head of Gyūba—a replacement was fashione d and secured to
the body  using a stainless-steel  bolt. And then two years and almost two
months to the day: a head. The head. Found at the Ayukawa bus stop just a
few kilometers away . They never reattached it. Sometimes, when the mood
strikes, they like to show it of f at the local museum.
I don’t pass old Gyūba on this walk, but when I do, I get close, think
about how almo st certainly you and I would have done the stealing as kids,
hacked it off for fun, thrown it down a ditch, fished it out and plopped it on
a bus stop when the guilt had eaten away at our guts. I like to touch the scar
on its neck, a scar I’m not responsible for, but feel as if I know the hearts of
those who are.
SHALLOW ROOTS
Years ago, today’ s route was closed. It had been officially off-limits for
ages, and replac ed with a detour long and boring. The lack of progress
annoyed me no end. In a burst of frustration, I walked up to Ishikura Pass—
where DANGER  was said to be—and took a peek . How bad could it be? What
I saw: clean-pressed downage of sugi—Japanese cedars—snapped like
toothpicks, thrown across the path by a typhoon. One of many yearly
typhoons, typhoons getting worse and worse it seems. The Kii Peninsula
already receives some four meters of rain each year. Increasing ly the target
of blunt-force climate trauma.
The first time I walked this peninsula I saw the muddy Kumano River ,
muddied they said because of a recent tremendous storm. The one that had
killed this person’ s husband. The one that erased this mountain road. The
one that all the diggers in the river were cleaning up, “fixing” the flow. The
1889 cataclysm on repeat.
But up on Ishikura Pass, in that jumble laid before me, I saw plain
evidence of the post-war lumber industry . They over-planted sugi like crazy .
Filling the forests with young sugi, industry sugi, weak  sugi—s hallow roots,
roots all the same length, easily  upturned by a stiff breeze. An old forest
wouldn’ t be so easily bowed. You feel this monocultural forestr y acutely in
the nose and eyes in February and March. And you hear it in the silence, in
the lack of birdsong along many of these paths.
I took a deep breath and decided to walk right through it all, right through
the jumble. Dumb move. Halfw ay through, as I clambered over and under
the logs,  they began to creak. If they had shifted just a few inches I’d have
gotten crushed—legs, chest, skull. They were young trees, yes, but still
trees. Idiot, I thought as I tried not to touch anything, as I wriggl ed my body
between the trunks.
Perhaps the greatest mystery of our childhood was simply survival. We
were protected only by the supp leness of our young bodies. Bryan, you and
I nurtured reckless impulses as if they were ducklings. One summer
afternoon: I dare you, let’s bike as fast as possible and shove our sneakers
between the front tire and the fork, see how far we can fly. We did it,
flipped headlong  and foolhardy forward, should have broken all our bones
but broke none, bloodied our legs and elbows, scarred still, scuffed the hell
out of our grips, rode with untrue wheels from that day forwa rd until we
gave up the bikes and childhood gave us up, moved us on.
Years pass. Today I walk the route and everything has been cleaned up. As
I stand in the middle of what used to be chaos, surrounded by the clean
lines of a lumb er forest, I look at my forearms, my calves, wonder how
close I was to losing a hand or foot. After having brushed risk so many
times, long detours around dang er seem silly. Pointless to a mind where—
for so long—the re were no detours, where little was done properly , where
everything was a shortcut and without great luck, everything so easily cut
short.




FARMER AND HIS CA T
Coming off a tiny mountain, a blip of a hill, a farmer moves aside to let me
down the narrow route he was planning to walk. He has no hair or teeth. His
skinny gray cat comes forward, locks eyes with me, stops, so confident. The
cat’s eyes are an electric orange. I reach down to let it sniff my hand and off
it runs as though weightless. The farmer just nods and says, Good work.
Not about scaring the cat, but about walking the path. I say, Thank you, sir
(I like being extra-formal to farmers), and ask if the town is to the right or
to the left at the fork. To the left, he says. The way the words come out of
his mouth strikes me: They are said with a remarkable purity and kindness,
contain no malice or judgment. It is almost as if he is speaking to a tree. I
am happy to be a tree. Just head left, and you’ll find it. And I believe I will.





NACHI F ALLS
Ferocious rain last night, clear skies this morning. Because of that, Nachi
Falls are violent, pushing out a volume of water I’ve never seen. I’m here
alone, have the spot to myself. (Thanks, virus.) I’ve stood before this falling
water five or six times, and while pretty , sure, it’s usually been demure, tall,
but scrawny . Today , though, Lord—serious energy, serious power . I finally
understand why it has been worshiped. The air vibrates with the fizz of the
falls. The mist envelops me. I stand alone for fifteen minutes and trace the
lines and clumps of particles from the top down along the rocky cliff into
the pool below . Shape-shifting , swirling patterns, and within the swirls,
febrile hallucinations: faces, horses, baseballs, seemingly anything else
imaginable. It’s nice to see these things. Bryan, that a holy waterfall can
make me remember you, make me want to talk to you, is a testament to the
pliability of our minds. Of all people, Rufus Wainwright appears . In the past
I had once walked a stretch of terrible road for days listening to his baroque
pop song “Poses” on repeat until his haunted voice felt like it was coming
from the ground itself: “All these poses, oh, how can you blame me / Life is
a game and true love is a trophy .” There was a haunted echo of that song
somewhere in the waterfall—the conducting, the chorus, an impossible
trophy . A song of Wainwright’ s own youthful solitude in New York. A song
of him doing his own kind of solo stroll, new black brand-name sunglasses
in hand.  Wainwright’ s middle name is McGarrigle. I remember you telling
me your middle  name, embarrassed, as if you had anything to do with it. It
wasn’ t McGarri gle, that’s for sure. But it was an old name from an old
place, much older than anything we knew , and I was jealous of its history .
My middle name is nothing special, like an unsweetened Cheerio. I was
probably staring  too hard, too long at the falls. I was thinking of things that
had no right to commingle so easily in a brain. But, it was the first time I
had ever truly looked at a waterfall. As in, watched the water fall, doing so
with an attentiv e gaze. I was glad to be mesmerized and glad to have
traveled far .
There’ s a kissa up the road with a clear view of the falls. It has a second-
floor window in the shape of an elongated octagon. The famous three-
legged crow—t he yatagarasu —adorns its sign. The same crow seen in
illustrations and statues all over the Peninsula, adopted by the Japan
Football Associa tion on emblems and badges. The one said to have guided
Emperor Jimmu , Japan’ s supposed first emperor , back in 660 B.C.; so says
the “Book of John.” The three legs represent Heaven, Earth, and Mankind.
John goes on:
The Foundation Myth of Japan states that Emperor Jimmu sailed from
Kyushu to Osaka to battle indigenous tribes for control of the new
country . The first battle at Yamato (the Nara region) was lost and he
escaped, sailing down the coast to Kumano. It was here that he realized
that he had lost the battle because he had traveled from the west, against
the movement of the Sun Godd ess Amaterasu. The yatagarasu  guided
him across the rugged Kii Mou ntains from the east to victory , thereby
establishing the roots of Japan in Kumano.
And so, on this random kissa—t hat crow . Though I don’t enter the shop, I
always wave to the crow and press my face to the glass to see what has
changed. The shop is neat but odd, full of strange interior choices. Yes, like
before, the shop ’s sink is still full of boxes of tissues. But huh, this time
there are even more Tupperware containers filled with what looks like
cooked spaghetti. The walls are covered in self-portraits (presumably of the
owner). He perms his hair in tight curls, seems to bear an inten se affection
for his white minivan. There he is, standing in front of it—al ways alone,
just him and the minivan—at key points around the Peninsula . The café’ s
always been there and I’ve neve r seen it open, never seen anyone helming
it, but the door is never locked, a detail I make sure to confirm. Each visit I
leave behind on the window a mark from the oils on my nose,  take in the
tableau, the whoosh of so much falling water in the distance.
ASCETIC PRACTICE
Because I was near Nachi Falls,  the “Book of John” chimes in with a quote
from a diary he found doing research, a mid-Nara-period diary  from 749:
“Faintly from the woods near Kumano, a sutra. The monotonous hum
floated out, ambient and particulate. A party was sent to investigate and a
decayed body was recovered. When we opened the jaws of the skull, the
tongue of the corpse was found to be in perfect, fleshy condition.”
John goes on:
Nearly two hundred years later, in 915, Jozo, son of court Dainagon,
Fujiwara no Kiyotsura [what a name], lives three years next to Nachi,
beside those hundred-and-eleven-meter -tall falls. After conducting strict
ascetic training, mastering the rites of fire, his prognostications come
true and he performs miracles. Jozo writes: “Training in the Ōmine and
Kumano areas provided me with these powers.”
The Peninsula is filled with a history of men (mostly men) going deep
into the mountains to perform a series of secret activities so painful and
arduous that hazing doesn’ t begin to approximate their difficulty . These are
the mountain ascetics. I’ve participated in three days of their training up in
the mountains of Yamagata, and I can say with no hesitation: It is hard.
I wonder today what these men would have thought about the café with
the three-legged  crow , Tupperware, spaghetti. How the general shape of the
small village of Nachi was the same as it ever had been, but now with more
gift shop s, and pilgrims of an entirely different ilk. No retired emperors, just
regular fellas. The big ascetic ask of a modern pilgrim was simply
ascending a giant staircase.
Bryan, you and I were always in training. I can see this now. Training for
what? Life itself. Growing up. Baseball. Whatever . We had no waterfalls.
We trained in the ravine with a “river” fed by a sewer pipe. Our sutras took
the form  of increasingly profane words, our ascetic practices involved
blowguns made from reeds, darts from sewing needles, and Scotch tape.
Murder lurked. We always assumed a dead body was nearby . Just seemed
like a certainty of youth, of our childhood, of the town. Something we
anticipated with relish. We thought we found one—a body—in the woods
near Dairy Mart, but it was just a drunk, passed out. Hissed like a snake
when we kicked his thigh. Our power was biking as fast as we could, fire in
the chest, away from things that might kill us.


SHOTGUN SHACKS
Shacks and shotgun shacks. Everyone a farmer . Hyper -territorial dogs. No
one pays me any attention but the dogs—rough, neglected thing s. Bark bark
bark. Yeah yeah I see ya boys, I see ya.
I walk on and also see a man who looks about two hundred years old,
sitting in the kind of onesie pajamas I’d imagine a mountain person of yore
wearing. Behind  him: a pile of tin cans, stacked like a cairn. His house has
four satellite dishes strewn around the yard, looking like relics of some
lesser Cold War.
It’s hours into the day’s walk and a bizarre impulse fills my being: to get
down on all fours and bark with the dogs, bark facing those satellite dishes,
just to see what  it feels like. I’ve felt untethered since leavin g our town,
since arriving in Japan. I am “here” but am I her e? Perhaps this limbo
makes sense to you now .
This impulse to transform myse lf comes over me at the most unexpected
moments. What would it be like to be this, whatever or wherever “this” may
be: A server at that diner with all the pickup trucks back across  the ocean?
The owner of a camera shop in Shinjuku run for sixty years? A crow
circling Hong ū? To be the one soaking in a tub in some house I pass during
a night walk through Tokyo, classical music playing, the faint smell of a
Hope cigarette in the air? To be adopted by an inn and make  a life from
that, to shed the past in some formal way, a way accepted as “valid” by
society at large? This, my walking, what was this? A path of my own,
unvalidated by anyone but myself? A dope drinking too much coffee—
definitely that.
I see these sad dogs and can’t stop myself from imagining living out my
days on their chain, part of this landscape, the deafening shrill of insects
rising from the woods.


OKONOMIY AKI
Walking into Susami, I see a shirtless man clipping his fingernails over the
edge of his first-floor balcony , studying the bay .
I climb the concrete stairs embe dded in the town’ s seawall—a huge pale
fortification rising several stories out of the mouth of the bay, closing off
the narrow entrance to the broader ocean. The top of the stairs is so high
and feels so unsafe that a wave of nausea spreads across my chest. There
are no guardrai ls. I imagine jumping off right there, that ever-present
suicidal quirk of a living mind. Behind me is the Pacific. To my left, the
little island of Inazumi with its Inazumi Benten Shrine. The sun is low. Its
light spills over the small boats docked in the bay. One step forward and the
fall would break my legs and more.
I stroll the golden sun-kissed village. Bupkis. I’m about ten years too late.
A little okonomiyaki  shop is the only thing open. Stick my head in, empty
shop, owner—female, late sixtie s—watching TV. Got room for one? I ask.
She looks at me like I’m vomi ting the virus all over her floor . Wraps her
mouth and head with her neck towel. I babble a little more, tell her how
long and far I’ve walked, throw out a few compliments. She acquiesces,
lowers the towel  suspiciously , points me to the back seat. Says: You swizzle
that thing and yourself good now with alcohol, yeah.
I ask her for grilled udon without pork, but with kimchi and she looks at
me like I’m doing the viral vomit thing again. Okay , she says, if you want
that.
She hobbles around the shop. Seasons the pile of vegetables and noodles
on the skillet with mighty shake s of salt and pepper tins. Mashes the mess
with metal spatulas. Scrapes it onto a plate and hands it over and says,
Don’ t know if it’ s any good ’cause I ain’ t never before tasted such a thing.
I chopstick a noodle, slurp it up, say , This’ll do.
This’ll do, she repeats back.
I tell her where I live and she says, Aww heck, I visited there  last year.
Took a plane. No. Took a train. No, took … a plane. Dangit. No, took a
train. That’s right. Took a bus. But first a train. Took the Shink ansen. First
time ever on the Shinkansen. Can you believe it? Everyone laughed at me.
First time?! And I says, I ain’ t got no reason to ride no Shinkansen.
I ask her how it was.
Wasn’t nothing special, she says. Just a quick train, ain’ t it.
I ask if she’ s been abroad.
Taiwan and Korea, she says. Never been to no Hawai’i. Always gabbin’
with my friend, let’s go to Hawai’i, and we say it over and over and that’s
just where it stops. Ain’t never getting there.
Her shop—her shack—was right next to the bay, and I ask if she ever
thought about the ocean, waves, tsunamis.
I’m ready to die any good damn time, she says. No wall gonna  keep that
sea back. That’ s fine. Too much junk anyway , needs a good cleaning out.
Back in our town there’d have been something vaguely biblical about her
prognostication, but here, no, it was just as plain a fact as any .
So you just walkin’  all over , huh, what a thing.
I finish the noodles. Perfection. You should add this dish to your menu, I
say, smiling. I had sensed a growing gaze of fondness upon my slurping. I
want to stand up and walk over to her and squeeze. Her form is spherical.
Her teeth are filled with silver . Her fingers, doughy pads. Eventually I say,
Thanks for putting up with me. I didn’ t mean to be a burden, just wanted a
hot meal. And she laughs and shakes her head and says, Pay up, hon.
Someone else might come in any minute now .
DISP ATCH: THE HOTEL
About the hotel for the evening,  I’ll say this: The view is lovely . Waves lap
in near-darknes s. The bath is totally fine, but it’s skirted by a huge,
unfinished slab of concrete flooring, drains around the edges. Looks
perfectly suited for hosing down a horse corpse. Or melting human bones.
If murders haven’ t yet happened  here, they will. The laundry room is unlike
any I’ve seen. I refuse to believe it can render anything clean. The manager
works without appropriate precautions, maskless, shifts uncomfortably
under ordinary gaze, seems like a man concealing terrible things and doing
so badly . I’ll be leaving early tomorrow morning and skipping breakfast.

KISSA  RON
I wanted eggs. Kissa Ron looked up to the task. Looked the apotheosis of
shibui,  which translates  clumsily as an “impossible cool,” or “aged cool,” or
maybe “rusty cool,” or even “somber cool.” Old men in well-proportioned
vintage suits are unintentionally  shibui. Turn-of-the-century buildings run
by folks who don’t know the architectural gem they got on their hands—
shibui. Kissa Ron is like that. Lights off, golden morning light, Venetian
blinds half-drawn. Ron is dark in a pleasing way. No-smoking signs line the
walls. And yet, men with snow-white hair arrive alone and pick up ashtrays.
It feels like a Raymond Chandler scene. Feels like I’ve crawled into a cigar .
The brown ceiling paper is stained and peeling, but the old globe lights
look elegant just hanging there. “Tonight, I Celebrate My Love”  plays on an
overhead speaker . Peabo Bryson and Roberta Flack croon to each other . The
romance is overwhelming. I eat one heck of an elaborate breakfast: coffee
and toast with butter and jam, a fried egg, a Chinese-style salad involving
seaweed, a scoop of cold spaghetti, a dollop of potato salad, and of
course … pineapple? It would have come with bacon too, but I haven’ t
eaten mammals in over a decade, so I had her leave it out. The “her” being
the owner . She operates without discrimination, Welcome, welcome, sit
wherever you like.
These kissas meld together , in the moment and in the mind. That’ s—in
part—the point: a static variable within the dynamic churn of life.
Something familiar , as if to say: Yes, you know this. A kissa here will
mirror a kissa there. Kissas across the country toe the kissa line and toe it
well. Kissa Ron has its own unique qualities (like the lattic ed wooden
barriers between seats providin g something like privacy), but it shares
remarkable swaths of DNA  with a kissa in Hakodate, a kissa in Kagoshima.
That blighted hotel was serving  fish this morning. A man can eat only so
much morning fish. I craved toast, eggs, burnt coffee. There was a near-
100-percent certainty a kissa would deliver . This despite there being no
kissa regulatory body , no secret parent company owning them all. Shibui is
their default aesthetic, born of a certain moment in the mid-twentieth
century , the Sh ōwa era, carried forward without af fect or self-awareness.
Inside Ron, next to the entrance: an elegant, classic wooden telephone
booth. It contains a vacuum cleaner. I ask when it last contained a phone
and the owner explains that if you don’t put at least 5,000 yen worth of calls
through a public phone each month, they disconnect it. It was disconnected
over two decades ago. Dethroned by cellphones, the neutered booth
remains. A good prop and a useful closet in a dark room full of silent old
men, rising smoke, tinkling silverware, porcelain placed against porcelain.
SPIRALS
You won’t belie ve it, but I still remember it to this day. Your number . A
number I’ll never forget. A number I’ve dialed a billion times: 569-7441.
That there, the most intimate thing I’ve ever committed to text. It almost
hurts to write it down, like sharing a mantra, like sharing the true name of
love. Not words, but primal, more pure, mathematic. Atomic. Like a helix
on a standard pad. The singsong  of those tones is one of the sweetest I’ve
known. Same now as it’s ever been. A melody of connection, of friendship,
of annoyed older sisters, soon pregnant, slamming phones after yelling,
Craig, stop calling SO GODDAMNED  MUCH .
THE BLUE HOME
Fueled by the bounty of Ron, I walk the town of Kishimoto. The sun is
directly overhea d and the air is infused with the scent of the ocean, which is
right there, just there, and if not always visible, always shifting the air
pressure, however subtly , always pulsing nearby .
A hunched woman disappears into the shadows of a vegetabl e shop. A
cemetery covers the face of a hill, graves just high enough to avoid a minor
flood. Homemak ers hang laundry and futons out along cinder -block walls. I
stop and watch the tonbi  kites circling above near their mountaintop nests.
Hundred-year -old Taishō-era houses of a Western style remind me of the
coastal homes back across the ocean—single-family , simple structures,
agricultural, almost like barns. The paint of their wooden-plank siding
weathered by a persistent ocean breeze. And in seeing that, I remember the
coastal boardwalks where, I was told, my grandfather would sell whatever
he could get in bulk as a kid—newspapers, clothespins, onions—and later
go on to sell pens door to door, company to company , between shifts at the
factory . Sort of like us two, you and me, Bryan, going around , collecting
cans in black garbage bags, dragged on the road, a wake of clamor , hauling
them to the supermarket to shove in those return machines. Hands and arms
sticky with the drizzle of soda and beer, pockets full of wrinkled bucks and
nickels, big dumb smiles on our faces as we walked home beside the fields.
...
The sun is crushing. I’m comically drenched by my own juices. I duck
down a narrow alley to find shade and come up short. It’s so hot that I sneak
into someone’ s yard and crouch in a sliver of darkness below a well-
manicured bush, pull out my water bottle, chug it with desperation. And
when I finally open my eyes, there it is: a blue, wooden-shi ngled home
plopped in front of a gravel lot and bone-dry vegetable patch. Peeling paint,
windows framed  in white. The roof is Japanese, tiled, but the aura of the
whole thing—the well-used quality of it as an object, painted the color of
midday sky—te leports me like falling on my back from antics in an oak
tree, like having all the air knoc ked out of my chest: It is summer and you
and I are runnin g around your own blue wooden home, a place  of absolute
joy. I never told you how much I loved that place, how much it meant to be
there with you, near that home . This was back before everyone replaced
their shingles with vinyl. (“You never have to paint it!”) The wood held our
memories—a house worn and used, used up. We’d have used it up more if
possible, if it didn’t drive your parents insane. In the moment, as a child, I
had no words for my emotions, but now I realize that I was filled with the
desire to enter the walls of that home and seal myself in. Evidence of our
play abounded: in the ruined lawn and holes in the yard, in the makeshift
baseball diamond with a trash-lid home plate. But most permanently in
those walls, the walls of the home itself, the blue walls chipped and dented
by wayw ard rocks and high balls. You throw me one, a high ball. I back up,
back against the rough shingles, pushing myself into your home  and I’m too
scared to catch it with the glove in front of my face. I hold it down low, like
I’m scooping up cat litter. Come on, Craig, you say, you got this. Trust the
glove.
Crouching unde r that bush in Kushimoto, five thousand miles from your
house (is it still there? If it was torn down, would the town collapse into
itself like a black hole?), drench ed in sweat from the blazing summer sun, I
realize: You truly were as close to a brother as anyone I’ve ever known.
Best friend, of course. But more. We didn’ t need our connection to be
ordained from god or law or even from blood. Where was that line of
family? We drew it in the dirt with a fallen branch and crossed  it together ,
telling the world to screw itself.  We’d get into trouble everywhere—inland,
shorefront, made no difference. Had each other ’s backs. We pissed in the
tank of a lawnmower for no good reason. We chopped down a stranger ’s
baby maple. We sprinkled gasoline on lawns, lit them on fire with our secret
lighters. We ghost-rode our bicycles down the street just to see how far they
could go. Once, my bike hit a car and was convinced I was going to jail.
Many around us did. You know  this. Our idiocy was an idiocy born from
too much idle time and no sense of guidance. Where was the authority?
Drunk, often. Asleep in a car with a hose in the window , stressed out of
their mind. Deviance was our way to bond, to share danger and risk in the
name of a conne ction we so desperately craved. Inhaling togethe r a freedom
like heroin, in an era before the opium epidemics. While my grandparents
and mother were placid, chill, hardworking teetotalers who drank mainly
tea, rarely coffee, the other home s were rife with alcoholism or worse. Early
on, I intuited that I could use computer smarts as a way to escape, but even
that path wasn’ t without traps. One neighbor—an old COBOL  programmer
—offered me a bump of cocaine as he drove me in his red Honda CRX to a
computer fair to buy a modem. I was maybe twelve. Another friend’ s home
was known for a wall of guns collected by his father , a Vietnam vet.
Switchblades were trinkets to covet and often carried in pocket. A kid down
the street, a few years older , invited us over. Do you remember this bullshit?
Locking us in the basement? Came down wearing a gas mask and carrying
a machete saying, Welcome to hell. In his waistband was a handgun. We
were eight or nine. The kid let us go after I burst into tears. But you—you
were ready to fight, always ready to fight, to stick up for me, for something
bigger than the two of us.
Each of these moments could have ended differently . The fights, always
taken to the edge of terrible. I remember an instant in the middle of some
strange neighborhood brawl, I almost stomped a kid’s head. I had thrown
him on the ground after he had punched me in the face. Foot raised, ready
to slam but shifted a few inches to the side at the last millisecond. I came
home with a black eye that swelled up like a grapefruit. In that fraction of a
moment before putting my foot down on his skull, I realized I had a choice.
I could choose to not stomp. I could choose to not ruin both of us. I was so
young but this feeling was there. Maybe it was in all of us. Recognizing it
felt like big Jesus was whispering his magic into my ear— there are better
ways . How would it have changed for me if I had let that violence deeper
into my bones? It would have ended differently , I’m sure. You showed me
that. Because for you, it did. In the end you did fight, many fights, finally
the wrong fight. The violence found you, entered you. Though your murder
some twenty-six years ago didn’ t make sense to me then—an event I didn’ t
have the tools or time or space to comprehend—I can now see how tragedy
waited for us both. Your death, another tragedy in a town beset with
tragedy: a fight in some moldy kitchen, a butcher ’s knife to the chest, bled
out on a dirt yard under the stars. What did you say in those last moments?
What did you see?
When you’re seventeen, childhood feels close enough as to be endless and
the memories so dense as for their loss to be unthinkable. The idea of
talking with you—of rememberi ng it all—has only grown more valuable as
time passes. A long walk through a distant land, so distant from where we
both started, and where you ended; I somehow made it out. Shit, do I carry
a jinxed guilt, an unshakable guilt? Of course I do. One, two, three, I rap on
the table  with my knuckles whenever I think of your murder . One, two,
three, a strange anxiety tic from childhood. Still there. I squeeze my eyes
and feel the same relief I felt in elementary school. Blinky . Resetting the
bootloader of the mind. Turning  back the curse. One, two, three. I’ve been
tapping that for twenty-six years. Because I wonder always if I could have
done more. Was there a way to pull you into my secret orbit of computers
and geekery? The older we got, the more you veered bad. Not by choice—
there was so little opportunity for choice—but by the tides of systems,
schools, tests. You never did as well as I did. What could I have done? I ask
myself this with every step on the road. But then I remember , too, how
living itself—just getting throug h the confusing days of those years, where
we had no real autonomy—was enough to run kids into the ground.
Insidious, scarcity-brain stuff. Many of our peers were enfeebled, reduced
by circumstance . We saw what  was around. Few guiding lights, faint and
flickering. It was all I could do to keep my footing, to build up those arcane
technical skills and get moving, to get as far away as possibl e, and walk
walk walk, walk it all off. You got this, Craig, you’d have  said. Trust
yourself, trust your shit. You aren’t no motherfucker like them. You would
have said that and spat. Man, could we ever spit.


SEAMUS
Keep walking, keep walking. I haven’ t turned toward your murder in
decades, yet it lives in a small  box in a windowless room down a dark
hallway in the back of my mind. Emits faint noises daily . A blue house in
the wild, synapses kicked loose , a peek inside that box. The weather today
mirrors my inner world. Gloomy to say the least. Clouds from early
morning. The rains returned. I worry again about leeches, check my ankles
incessantly . My head. My arms. All day, I spit in your honor . Spit on
everything I see. Can still hit a target twenty feet away , no problem. We
were friggin’  spitting Olympians.
The route is at elevation, but mostly empty backroads, almost no forest
walking. Were I to be chopped up on a walk, today is the day. Banjos loom.
I sing “The Ballad of Paladin” and imagine the day ending with Kiefer
Sutherland and a dead body . We loved Stand by Me because it was a movie
and a fortune about us. We were  seen. Death death death. I pass few homes
and the homes I pass are done, nasty , falling apart and covered in garbage,
committed to anomie. I say hello to an old woman and she just says, They
done saw a bear o’er yonder , watch yerself. I pass a giant makes hift kennel,
crammed with some twenty dogs, strewn with Styrofoam and plastic bags
and old rags and the dogs bark and huff at me as if to say, We have never
known friendship and will never know friendship and we don’t believe in
friendship and will never be your friend for we know only this filth within
which we live and BEGONE BEGONE RUFF RUFF . The sadness of these
dogs seems to infuse this whole damn sloppy world.
These days—th e bright days and love-filled days and days of hope, of
course, but even these lost days, rotten days, soiled days—I want to tell you
about everything  I see and feel: the dogs, the road, the broken  shacks, the
abandoned truck s, the hog farms squealing with terror and doom. Man,
you’d have lost it listening to those poor pigs. Their smell, walk ing through
the stench of those animals soon to be slaughtered. The stink hanging in the
air, like being waterboarded with a tub of rotten syrup. The stark
terribleness of it all reminds me of a mongrel we once knew from
childhood: Spooger . What a name. (The words that stick with us through the
years.) Tormented at the limit of his leash (by us, by others), bloodthirsty ,
always just beyond reach. The poor dumb beast was never let inside.
I walk. My pack feels filled with bricks. The landscape itself becomes
your absence. The road endless,  the dreariness crushing. A sense of burnout
lingers. The walk will end. I don’t want the walk to end. The walk ending
means being thrust back into the “world.” Back into the distractions of it all.
COVID or not, busyness waits on the other side of the walk, and busyness
means losing this thing I have with you right now, this connection, this thin
line of commun ication. I yell your name to those weak cedar s with their
shallow roots:
BRYAN, YOU DICKF ACE.
Just as I’m sure you’d have yelled to me.
Finally , I make it off the moun tain and over the mighty Kum ano River
and to a bus stop I had staked out on a map. The skies had fully cracked,
and down the rain came. I’m breaking my walking-only rule, taking a bus,
that’s how thoroughly exhauste d I am. Can’ t handle the thought of hiking
over one more pass, soaked, pathetic.
And then, he appears: Seamus the Irish priest, lumbering across the
highway toward  me as I check and double-check the schedule. Konnichiwa,
he says. Doko iku? Suspicious (of any large body coming at me through the
rain), I squint and say, Hong ū, and he says, Oh, just get in yous, we’ll get
you there. The bus is coming any minute but Seamus won’ t have it. Get in
get in, that’ s just down the road.
He came to Japan in 1967, sent on assignment for the church. Lived in
Tokyo then Kanagawa then Kyushu. Now lives around here. Was no trouble
at all to drive me.
You’re a great man, Craig, a great man. You’re mad, mad! But a great
man. I can see it all over your dripping self, this mad greatness. It’s a
wonderful thing now , madness, isn’ t it?
I tell him where the walk had started, hundreds of kilometers away , weeks
back.
Aye, you’re ab-so-lutely  mad, but you’re  a powerful man, too. I was once
a powerful man, he says, downshifting as we enter a tunnel, but I just turned
eighty and those days are far behind me. I used to ride motorcycles, rode all
across Europe, rode to India to those ashrams, aye. It’s a miracle I’m still
alive.
We grab lunch together . I buy Seamus a coffee as thanks for the lift and
we cover almost everything two people can talk about in an hour. We cheers
our coffees and he says, You know where that comes from, aye—the Brits,
pewter mugs, and slammin’  ’em together so a wee bit of my ale goes into
yours and yours into mine and we know there’ s no poison in either one. We
talk about small-scale trust and trust at large and the beauty of the world
and wonder why it’s so hard for people to see, to see the beauty. For too
long, he says, the church made this world out to be the place of sin with the
wonder stashed up above, when the wonder lay here before us all along.
Bryan, you and I were taught to trust no one, certainly no one beckoning
with a car. I remember an older man with a comb-over who worked at the
local video store. He spent ages trying to convince us that he was a director ,
a damn fine one, that he would make us—two little shits—f amous, was
putting together a movie. Just come with him, get in his car, come to the
shoot at his house. It was a movie that would have involved us taking off
our shirts. Christ.
And now here, Seamus the Irish émigré seems to embody every thing our
old town  wasn’ t. Palliative, an encounter like this. I learn more sitting in
silence with Seamus for five minutes than I had from my father over a
decade. Stack a thousand moments like this together and you might begin to
heal a heart, domesticate the feral among us. But even believing in Seamus’
goodness, I still feel many years  later—our innate impulse to run, to trust no
one. An impulse encoded on a cellular level, one felt more in the muscles
than understood by the mind.
So I try to regard this man before me with an openness foreign to us. If I
believed in some kind of higher logic, if I was so narcissistic as to think
such a thing, I’d say my yelling into the forest somehow manifested Seamus
as a message from you. As if to say: Hey, Craig, you fool, my brother , this
too, this kindne ss and gentle honesty , this shit’s also out there amid the
cocksuckers and dickweeds. As if I had been walking within a thin strand of
Kii’s dark voodoo, and incanted in just the right way to produce a priest.
But I know that isn’t true. Which makes Seamus all the more remarkable,
the encounter all the more anagogical.
Seamus finishes  his coffee and stands up. He puts on his jacket and comes
around the table and before I know what’ s happening, he gives me a great
bear hug, his jolly flesh pressing against my chest. It jolts me out of a daze
months or years in the making. How long had it been since I had been
properly hugged?
His stom ach contains galaxies and I’m swimming between the stars where
everything back on the Peninsula, on earth, is suddenly so small. Gorgeous,
breathtaking, tragic, full of ravishing, pulsing life, yes, but tiny, minuscule,
almost nothing. Paper cuts fuse with holocausts. Nuclear physics merges
with pizza toast melting into fried bologna. A swell of love—the precise
amount of love a child needs to thrive—expands across the universe to
Andromeda. A hug filled with DMT . I feel dizzy , elated, heartbroken,
ebullient, crushed, favored by luck, and favored by misfortune. He pulls
away and grasps my hands with both his giant paws and shake s them with
vigor , pulling me back into my body and the now saying, You’re a great
man, Craig, turn toward it all. You are stronger than you think. It was an
honor to meet you and I wish you continued peace.
Now the Peninsula voodoo was coming back to me. His simple blessing
like an ice bath, coolness spreading throughout my body from  the center ,
like the whole of the day, mayb e the whole of the walk, was leading to this
beacon of safety for us both, to this encounter in the rain on the side of the
road, to this unexpected benediction.

ZELDA
Filled with the power of that hug, I walk. Ahead, a clustered burst of trees
towers beyond the farmland—as  sure a sign as any of a shrine. There aren’ t
many spots to rest along these roads. Few benches, fewer cove red benches
for a guy as white as me. I am eternally grateful for these shrines and their
shade. Shrines: primeval community centers, places of activity , where
villagers bond during seasonal festivals. The grounds of the shrines filled
with trees and rocks (those touchstones) for the gods, the many kami—
natural temptations to draw them down to commune with and help out those
villagers.
As I make my way into the shrine’ s inner grounds, the brightness of the
open-sky farmla nd is replaced by the cool darkness of the canopy . Not only
does the temperature drop, but the air itself seems to thicken. As I cross the
torii gate’s thres hold, I feel an intense collision of realities. There is the
reality of the shrine itself, but then there is also the reality of so many
afternoons sittin g before our old TV, playing Zelda, you by my side. Those
chunky 2D graphics. We lived in them for months of our lives, a few hours
each day. Projected our own colors and lights and textures into that small
digital world, a world so large in our growing, hungry minds. And now, it’s
here, what we had envisioned long ago: the flitting dragonflies, the glancing
sunbeams, an ever-deepening green, the tiny ponds and once-old—now
ancient, dilapidated—stone bridges. The shrine itself, enveloped by trees,
rising within it all. I’ve seen scenes like this a thousand times during walks,
but it isn’t until the alchemy of today , this moment, this light, this air, the
residue of the hug, this particular hue of exhaustion and solitude, that the
connection is so obvious.
I’ve been looking for this shrine for nearly three decades. We had secretly
set some  far-off marker beyond the horizon and suddenly I arrived, without
ever knowing we had been searching for this very place.
Dazed, I ring the bell, clang some coins into the saisenbako, clap, and say
hello and thanks to the local kami, whoever they might be.
I sit in a notch of sun on the worn wooden steps and eat a rice ball. In the
distance, the joyful screams of rare Peninsula children at recess fill the air.
Around me the nightingales sing.

LUCK
Bryan, as you know—as we know—opportunity is not parceled out equally .
And luck is nothing if not a direct product of abundant opportunity . I have
not alwa ys been  lucky on the Peninsula, and the Peninsula has not always
been welcoming . For all the goodness I feel, sometimes this place can be a
true asshole. High up on the Ōmine Okugake Michi route, years ago, I’ll
tell you what happened: I survi ved our town just to almost fall off a cliff.
The bamboo grass hid the edge of the path. My foot slipped. The drop was
substantial and straight onto rocks. Somehow , I caught a root, pulled myself
back up, felt my heart slam itself against my ribcage.
John was there. He heard me slip and yelp, turning back just in time to see
me haul myself up.
We had underes timated the path. Ropes led down from ledges. Chains
came later. We contended with fifty-foot walls in a sleety typhoon. Man, it
was bananas. Days scaling things like this, expansive valley views always
steps away, soaring valley drops similarly close. An easy route to score a
hangman’ s break. A wild route, a hard route, almost no “walking.”
Also a route with a strange history . It’s an old mountain-asceti c training
path (still in use today), and as such, it has one of the last “no women”
sections of any walk in Japan. A huge sign is posted above a torii gate just
as you begin the incline up Mount Ōmine: NO WOM EN ALLO WED. It’s often
vandalized, which makes me smile. I tell women to ignore it, to go up the
mountain. Is this even technica lly legal? Enforceable? This ban? I don’t
think it is.
The mountains are generally considered to be “female deities” and as
such are “jealous” of women traipsing over them. So it is said, foolishly .
It would be one thing if beyond that gate lay an austere gathering of
serious men doing serious thing s with their cocks in hand, but I have been
beyond that gate, and I can tell you: While some serious men are there (the
priests, the true practitioners), there’s a bunch of jabronies, too. It’s the one
section of the Ōmine you can go up and down in a day—stay in the lovely
village of Dorogawa (“Dirty River”) and hike up. So you get local yokels
stopping for beer and cigarette breaks, being generally  loud and
unimpressive. Nothing ascetic about what they’re up to.
But why the ban to begin with? As we walk, John explains that while in
Buddhism there  is no place for banning women from sacred sites, the issue
is that the mountain ascetics—the shugenjya —were “lay priests.” Priests
when in the mountains, but “normal” guys back in town. As such they were
still in contact with the everyday world. It’s all a bit messy , the lines
defining the edges of these words, these positions, these roles. Japanese
mountain asceti cism is a syncretic mix of old Shinto, Buddhis m, Taoism,
and Northern Shamanism. The men went into the mountains to receive
supernatural powers. They gained great knowledge of the environment and
the use of moun tain plants for medicinal purposes and dietary supplements.
So in a way, it was supernatural. The women stayed in the villages to attend
to the ills of the villagers, to become attuned to their mental and physical
challenges. The men returned with that plant knowledge, and the women
applied it.
But the men also entered the mountains to escape life’s temptations. Sex
being one. A classic original case of trying to create a safe space. A
mountain “man cave.” As silly as we may find this, others have  also found
it dumb throughout history . The famous thirteenth-century Zen priest Dogen
openly criticized the banning of women from sacred sites like these.
Anyway , John and I crossed this threshold onto the manly part of the
mountain, and I almost died.
Along the way we met a local man named Asamura. Asamura  the Wise
but also Asamura the Wild, a man cut from a rawness you would have
instantly recogn ized, Bryan. A man who biked across a frozen continent in
January on a budget of almost nothing. Who was picked up in parks by cops
because they were convinced he would die in the elements, put in motels on
a local police budget. A man who did jumping jacks all night to stay alive
up north , once, when he miscalculated the cold in the mountains. A man
who hides his heart in the way you and I hid ours, and in that way, a man I
trust. A man with raw hands but a delicate face, gentle eyes. A Buddhist
sculptor . He repairs statues around the Peninsula (wooden ones; not stone
ones like the headless Gyūba Dōji), carries his huge, detailed works on his
back across this unfor giving landscape, and John and I had been unwittingly
admiring his craft for years. A secret pair of hands behind the scenes. A man
who views this unyielding path with equanimity , walks backward, lithe like
a snow leopard, never had a fall.
He wasn’ t officially a guide. Nor was he formally a practicing mountain
ascetic, but he embodied their spirit, and perhaps in that way was more pure
than even the official practitioners. Later John would write to me: “In
addition to Pure Land Buddhism, Shugend ō (mountain asceticism) had a
strong influence on the Peninsula. Due to its isolated locati on, and the
length of a return journey being over one month, a guide was necessary .
The best of these guides were given the title of sendatsu . The original
meaning of sendatsu was someone who had achieved a level  of guiding
mastery through  ascetic practice, and was now showing the way for other
followers.”
Sendatsu, yes. Asamura was that if nothing else. We met him. John did his
thing. The Ef fect was cast, and Asamura joined our walk on the spot.
A few days later, still up high, deep in man-only territory , a wail: Andr ew?
There is no Andrew . Just darkness of camp. Midnight silence, the
temperature having dropped some twenty degrees to zero from midday and
while we knew it was coming it still hit fast and hard. Asamura and John
and I stood around the campfire for dinner—too cold to sit—shoveling
beans into our mouths and drinking steaming soup and then, by eight,
slipping into our individual tents and saying goodnight.
Andr ew!?  A sorro wful cry on the edge of dream. No Andrew here! I yell
back, mainly annoyed. I had finally fallen asleep. So tired. So cold.
Miserable, sorta. Miserable but delighted? Yes. The Ōmine Okugake Michi
has limited water supplies and we had found the water spot. We didn’ t die
the previous day. I didn’ t snap my neck on rocks. Yes, delighted enough. I
zip the sleeping bag up around my face like a mummy , sink back to sleep.
Asamura and I wake before sunrise and John is gone. We check the
nearby emer gency hut. There he is, curled up in two sleeping bags. You
were yelling for someone named Andrew , I tell him. Damn, he says, was
going hypothermic, seeing things.
Laughing—as you do when you skirt danger—we take a photo together ,
in front of a small mountain shrine, looking battered and feral, farcically
disheveled. I adore this photo. It shows John as human, fallible , when he is
in so many ways the least fallibl e man I’ve ever met. Standing there next to
him and Asamura I felt so many potentials. Asamura protected us on that
walk, of this I’m certain. He showed us the safest route, handed over extra
supplies. Not a brother but brotherly . I wish I could carry his archetype back
in time to us, to light that safer route. What I mean is: Somehow as an adult
I’ve managed to attract and surround myself with these people, these
beacons of good. People we never had. I love them so much that my bones
ache—ache because I know I’ll lose them someday . I will follow them
anywhere. Together we walk in the near-frozen morning air and the sun
rises. Light works its way across the rippling peaks of the Peninsula.
Feeling returns to hands, to feet, to hearts. The mind moves once again. We
carry our lives on our backs and traverse the spine of the world, no humans
for miles, no routes down, just forward or back, the beast below always
shifting, always ready to heave us of f.


THE “BOOK OF JOHN”
I think of John, of our adventures, and of our friendship, of the catalog of
knowledge built up together over nearly fifteen years. In time, the “Book of
John” has become stranger and stranger . It is not a book—certainly not one
printed. Even so, the “Book of John” feels something like the Tao, or
perhaps it is like the I Ching. It is not a divination manual, though it often
manifests things  you’d never find without it. And in that way, divines
truthfully without affect. The “Book of John” is definitely a way of being in
the world, and a way of commu nicating with the world. It is a talisman of
curiosity and it chooses love. It is strange, and never not working. But
working (smartl y) is in good accord with the “Book of John.” It is a vibe
and an enigma and a fart-joke paradox in an ancient script. The “Book of
John” applauds a well-timed potato chip. It compels a man to fly to Aomori
in the rain to drive around for five hours to eat apple pie and do some
“research.” Could this research have been done on the internet? Absolutely .
Would it have been in accord with the “Book of John”? Absolutely not.
Because, according to foundational principles animating the “Book of
John,” something electric happ ens between theory and praxis, and being
there—in the place, breathing the air of that place and stomping across the
ground—brings that magic, that ineffable and wonderful electricity , to both
the practitioner—the “researcher”—and those who may eventually get the
information. You have to belie ve this. This is what the “Book of John”
teaches in its outré ways. Its processes seem so simple, and yet are so
effective, that they tremble in—as Peter Matthiessen aptly describes
Machapuchare in The Snow Leopar d—mysterium tremendum . The “Book of
John” contains facts, but it is easy to be fooled. It is not about the facts. It’s
about pointing your compass toward a peculiar shrine, tucked behind a
peculiar dirt road, on a peculiar peninsula, far off the beaten path, confident
something worthwhile awaits.
LIGHTER
At my father ’s small home, so many years back—when I was cleaning it
out before the funeral, when I was rising from a bed of towels and blankets
on the living room carpet (I was too scared to sleep in his bed and the shag
carpet was pretty nice, honestly , felt like a cheap futon), I went through it
all. Shelf by shelf. Drawer by drawer . Camera in hand, photographing the
details.
I walked  the home in circles and shot. Ratios, light, textures. This was a
job, another job, I told myself. I understood the brief at once: ethnographic
study of a man who died alone. I didn’ t know this man, really , the man who
died. Long ago maybe I though t I did, but in aggregate he was as much a
stranger as anyone. His bedroo m was bare—just the bed and a dresser he
had owned his entire life. In the top drawer of that polished pinewood
dresser: a hula lighter from a honeymoon trip to Hawai’i—n ext to three
condoms that had expired decades ago and a stack of prayer cards—
reminding me of a time and place I had never been.
Two drawers below , a surprise: an unframed collection of my face
throughout the years. Loose photographs in an envelope. I remo ve the small
pictures one by one and place them on the floor . I stand and look down. A
childhood in broad strokes. And of course, you’re there too, unseen, same
crew cut, both of us having gone to the barber on the same day, that guy
Bruce. Hefty , towering, clippers  in hand. A man who cut our hair for nearly
a decade  before he was struck down by cancer . He survived, but for some
reason we never  returned. When I look at these faces I feel you somewhere
close by , trying to make me laugh.


DISP ATCH: CHILDREN
Even here, even on this penins ula where youth is vanishing, on weekday
afternoons, towa rd the end of a long day of walking, the elemen tary-school
kids are let out and roam about. Village or town or city, makes no
difference, elem entary-school kids walk as elementary-school kids walk.
They have nowhere to be and nowhere they want to be but in the walk.
Supple bodies bending and twisting as they shuffle forward, jumping,
crouching low, pushing one another over, bouncing back up. They walk,
and don’t even know it as walki ng. In this way, they are ideal walkers, and
have found the true walk. Their walk is a walk of peace, of a collective
social decision to allow it to happen. Eyes are on them. Eyes peering out
from behind hedges and eyes beside pushed-back curtains. Eyes attached to
adults who care, who have the yoyū to care,  who watch at a distanc e. Their
freeness of walk is a product of a cascade of this support. The kids don’t
know this but they feel it, show it in every little yelp. They bump into one
another and speed up and slow down. They run alongside rivers with their
umbrellas held behind, like miniature fighter jets landing on aircraft carriers
surrounded by dandelions.
...
The “Book of John” says that there’ s a literary turn of expression, of
something being so amazing that even the old poet Saigy ō “turned  back.”
Its provenance is said to come from Atashika, where that post-of fice ranger
I bumped into was living. There’ s a memorial in town next to a pine tree.
It’s said that Saigyō was so impress ed with the children of the village, so
moved by their brilliance and spark, that he said he could no longer go on,
turned back, went home.
...
I stop to chug an iced coffee from a vending machine. A group of thirty or
so eleme ntary-school kids are being herded like unruly geese onto a nearby
bus. They all wear the same dorky yellow hats, hats that would have gotten
us punched hard. WHA T ARE YOU DOING? they scream at me. Walking!
I yell back. OH YEAH, WHERE ’D YOU WALK FROM? And I tell them. I
tell them where I walked from and they just say , HOL Y SHIT .
...
The elem entary-school children run from me giggling. They hide behind
their umbrellas. As I pass them I say (to the umbrellas), Mighty fine little
town you got here (as I say to most kids I pass; “Nice town!” is a kind thing
probably not enough people say, certainly not to kids, and I mean it too—
these little towns are pretty nice), and one of the boys yells back, THIS
CRAPHOLE? AND JUST  WHA T THE HECK ARE YOU ANYW AY?
...
I stroll picturesque stream-flank ed ippon-uras and watch kids walk before
me in zigzaggy lines and think about how adults are so point-to-point
specific, but these children try their hardest to stretch out their walks home,
ducking into little nooks in the entryways of houses and behind stone walls,
poking one another , tugging on tree branches, howling and squawking with
those little leather Dutch backp acks bopping behind, trusted to get home
and trusted not to be messed with by anyone along the way. The heart
swells in witnes s to many things on a walk like this, but it swells perhaps
most in response to these kids, their walk, their grace, elevated by the
unspoken virtue of everything and everyone around them.
FOLSOM
The last day of the walk. Bryan, man, I wish I could say that it’s glorious
and perfect and full of sparkling joy, but I can’t. Bullshit. Total bullshit. The
entire morning I’ve been walking uphill, all logging roads, no cute kids, no
villages, blazing sun, breezeless . The rains are truly done. Summer , terrible
summer , is here. When there is “trail” it’s unmaintained and mostly rubbed
off the mounta in by land slippage. I have to shimmy alongside steep
unmarked ridges—sliding down, crawling back up—to get to a bridge to
cross a river. Almost give up and swim it. Bad shape, all of it, not fun to
walk. And the flies. Do you like flies? I’ve got no fewer than twenty flies
circling my head right now. Tiny flies flying into my eyeballs, behind my
sunglasses. Big bastards flying into my ears, my nostrils. If I open my
mouth they’ll make a run at it, persistent, suicidal. They’re craw ling all over
my arms and neck and shoulders, and I don’t mean every few minutes a fly
lands on me—I mean I’m swarmed. When I stop, even more descend.
In this frazzled state, my mind goes to the police report. You at the house
party . A house you didn’ t know , owned by someone you had never met. But
this was common, this was part and parcel of the town. Get wind of an
address, show up with a crew . Break-dancing, arm-wrestling, booze, weed.
Stupid stupid. The report is so detailed. Twenty , twenty-five other people, a
party of teenagers from town. Saturday night, Fourth of July. Firework
percussion in the distance. I was already far away and you’d never get any
farther . You could have left that house at any time—just leave, leave, it’s so
easy, so simple , to take one step and then another out that door, walk
anywhere else, do whatever you have to do to remove yourself from the
hexed equation— but you stayed. Three in the morning and the older guy
(though not much older) looking after the place comes back (he doesn’ t
even own it, the poor schmuck  was just watching it for a friend), there
wasn’ t supposed to be a party , doesn’ t like what he sees, starts cursing you
and the few remaining kids. Because you were kids. Strong bodies but kids
in mind, just hours away from being able to vote, to join the military .
(Which many would go on to do.) When I read the police report I read:
exhaustion, fear, stupidity , impulsiveness, petulance. Curses turn to punches
turn to knives. A stupid, stupid chain of events.
I yell at the flies. Call them every name we know . Oh, they are great flies,
aye, powerful flies. I want to kick them in their fly faces. I wish I had the
patience of Seamus. Or the silver tongue of John, to convince the flies that
they should fly somewhere else. Just one day spent with men like these and
you would have learned how to walk away from that house. But we didn’ t
learn. We were alone. The whole town was alone, abandoned by the greater
whole. Now, I’m truly alone. Left it all behind. Walked so far from where
we began. My strategy: the walk. The simplest strategy . Thirty years later
and I’m still operating on scarcity , still trying to put in the distan ce between
then and now. As if there would never be enough steps. As if that town
could reach out and grab me and pull me back at any moment. And so I
default to our talents—what we taught ourselves to do because it’s all we
could figure out—and curse loudly without witness. Hell yes, it’s cathartic.
The fucks and fuck yous. With each curse I feel my body lift off the ground,
but I also feel the remaining klicks and can’t believe how much more of this
I’ve got. Hours. Sweat in the eyes, I trudge on, head down. I put on Johnny
Cash’ s “Folsom Prison Blues” just to lighten the mood and it only makes
me more confused, leaves me marveling at how this incredible recording
had been  made inside a penitentiary , how this beautiful music could also be
so cursed, how all the men whoop and holler when he says he shot a man in
Reno just to watch him die. Stupid stupid, this impulse, this laziness,
scarcity breeding  scarcity , and then celebrated, this endemic scarcity lodged
within.
Eventually , I emer ge from the logging roads and the ruined forest covered
in dirt and swea t and leaves and mud and fly corpses. I depleted my water
hours earlier like a true doofus, was parched, would gladly place my mouth
on any liquid-bearing faucet. I spy a kissa. Stick my head in, and the looks
on the faces of the three patrons and the owner let me know with no
uncertainty: not this place.
I remember that vending machine in the field. Then, barefoot, frozen,
drunk. Now , hot, soaked, nearly a decade sober , wearing hiking boots,
having come down from the mountain path like a Sasquatch. My feet burn
in a different way. Finally , I find a vending machine next to an elementary
school. A few kids are running around outside in the playground . I sit in the
middle of the road. Half-hope a truck will take me out. Chug two bottles of
that same sports  drink. Pure elixir . Hug my pack like a teddy bear. Moan. I
could have slept away a lifetime right here.
And yet, still so much walk in the day. Fat, meaty kilometers. Electrolyte-
infused, I stand. The kids had gathered nearby as if witnessing a man shot in
Reno, resurrect ed. They cautiously initiate first contact and I issue a
gregarious Helllooooo tiny humans  in a low, wacky  voice and danc e a little
jig as I shoulder  my pack and—sensing my playful fellowship—they topple
into one anothe r and run circle s around my legs and poke me, shrieking,
asking WHERE YA GOIN’  HUH WHERE YA GOIN’  and I keep making up
names of countries and planets  and they keep saying THA T AIN’T  NO
REAL  PLACE.
Let’s be generous:
Hearts without violence. Children of simple abundance.
The road leaves  town and cuts through more rice fields stretch ing to the
mountains. An old man sitting in front of a shrine, smoking, asks me where
I’m from and I tell him and he says, No, not that—which prefecture?
My cursing of the world cease s. My heart feels annoyingly fragile—a
heart of deficit now filled with unwitting abundance. Made all the more
fragile because the end of the walk is in sight. And yeah, however
frustrating a day might be, however many flies might crawl over your
sweat-glistening face, a day walking is still something to be cherished. At
the beginning of a big walk the end seems implausible, a million years
away , like imagining the last day of an elementary-school summ er. In those
first hours of the break—hopping onto the bus, the last bus of the year,
sitting side by side—the possibilities felt limitless. Together , you and I’d
map out our days of idle nothingness, a string of trouble, bike rides, fights,
stolen cigarettes, and even though the days would tick by, we never quite
believed they’d  finish, that the end would arrive. And yet it would, of
course.
Slowly , then quickly: a bunch of crap would creep in. Sadness, mainly .
And that tightening knot in the gut of the looming rote responsibilities of
school. As the years passed I tested higher and higher and you tested lower .
So it came to be, the system cleaved us apart, placed you on a path to that
doomed house, established some hierarchy between us that had previously
never existed. My classrooms had computers. Yours barely had pencils.
Same town, different, unjust universe. I spent my teenage summers playing
music with privi leged kids who came from true abundance in far-off towns.
You worked the tobacco fields. Neither of us understood what was
happening until it was too late and awkward. The last time I saw you we
were seniors in high school, walking opposite directions down the street. A
street we had walked together countless times. We said hello , but it was
obvious that we were both embarrassed. We lacked the emotional
intelligence to bridge the fissure. But back in those childhood summers we
drew out our days like taffy, and no matter how much trouble we might get
into with our parents, we stayed  out, lying on our backs in piles  of leaves in
the woods, chewing reeds, watching the gentler stars appear , talking about
all the lives we were sure we’d live.
ASSO
I make it to Asso Station. Barely an open-air waiting room next to the
tracks. Maybe thirty meters square. Inside sit twenty middle-school-aged
girls shoulder -to-shoulder in their pleated-skirt uniforms all head-down in
phones. They take up every seat. Oh, Bryan, this scene. Miraculous. I could
pour gasoline on myself and light myself on fire and none of them would
look in my direc tion. The inconsequentiality of my existence to these girls
is beautiful. I eavesdrop as I wait for the train and hear them speak like us,
like little truck drivers using the gruffest of pronouns like omae  and temē
and saying things like: Bitch, what the fuck you gonna do about those
eyebr ows?
I want to high-fi ve each and every one of the little potty-mouth s. But you
better believe I hold still. Not a single twitch. Hold my breath. Would hold
my heart if I could, if I knew how. Hell—I want to know exactly what the
fuck she’ s gonna do.
...
I had walked thirty-four kilome ters to that station and I listened to those
girls and asked my body how it was doing and my legs said they could walk
all day and all night. My feet said, Well, we can do a few more hours. And
so I snuck out of that waiting room, skipped the train, decided to keep
going, to push out another nine kilometers or so and finish the goddamned
walk as a kind of rebuttal against, or refutation of, those earlier  curse-filled
garbage kilometers.
A FINISH
Off I set, energized and free. Firecrackers bursting in my brain—little pops
on the edge of my vision: the thirty-five-kilometer high. A high you get
over and over again on a long walk like this. It feels wonderfu l. Above, a
sky bruised by dusk. I feel you nearby . Your murder had happened just
weeks after we graduated from high school. I found out in the evening in a
place warm and far from home . Someone told me the news. I wandered
outside and lay in a hammock between two palm trees and cried. Above, a
dark sky I didn’ t know , stars you’d never see. Everything cut short. Through
pure luck I was on my way out, wouldn’ t look back for decades, until now,
until this landsc ape knocked it out of me with its anthropologic al decay , its
natural lushness, a lushness our ravine always aspired to but never quite
achieved. The farms I see here, like farms we knew on the edge of town. So
distant and yet the parallels are unmistakable. The few children on these
paths make me think again and again about how it could have been.
Economically , the people of this peninsula don’t have much more than we
had, and yet the dif ferences jolt: the violence, it’ s gone.
I have been walking for you. Every walk has been a walk in your name to
get us both to this place. A place like our home and yet not. A place with
abundance. Spiritual, cultural, historical, social abundance. I can walk as far
as I want. The rules have changed. The limitations are gone. I can walk to
Osaka or Kyoto, heck I can walk to Almaty or Istanbul. A world collapsed.
Seamus’ s belly . Distances rendered meaningless. I feel capable and alive
and glad to be in the walk, swaddled by the walk and the cool night air.
Explosions behind my eyes. The abandoned tennis courts and shops
scintillate. Were it possible, I’d call you right now—wake you up and ask
you what you remembered of our childhood because I know so much is
locked away in your mind.
I think about my angry days— so many—of youth and recent years, of
how I never thought I’d make it this far, of how—so long ago—I built up
the toolk it along side you for cursing the road and life so thoroughly and
skillfully . Anger: a survival instinct. It’s all we knew . No reconciliation, just
anger . Broken, on the side of a mountain, that surge of anger and frustration
was everything.  A quake, a rising sea shaking loose all the decomposing
shit inside the mind. I had to spit it all out—execrate the road and the trees
and the flies—ju st purge my brain and guts and spine of garba ge onto that
wretched path on that wretched mountain.
I’ve been thinking about the okonomiyaki woman. Her silver teeth
flashing. Can’ t get her words out of my mind. She spoke of Methuselah
purifications. Come and wash it all away , she said. Once cleansed, the mind
soars and the body becomes light, keeps moving no matter how disgusting
it feels, how used-up it may be. Because, good lord am I used up—my stink
could wilt an oak tree, would send a dog running. The ultimate mark of a
summer ’s day well lived.
That night back in Susami, after the okonomiyaki woman told me of her
willingness to die, I said to her: Oh, well, if the big quake comes right now,
you know I’m throwing you on my back and we’ll be at the top of that
mountain right there in no time, yeah?
And she just laughed and laughed.
I feel certain in these final kilometers that I can carry her, can carry you,
carry some thousand-pound burlap sack of our sorrows and commensurate
retributions. I am strong. I see this now. Seamus was right. Stronger than
I’ve ever been. A strength pulled from these people around me, from a love
we never knew . There is yoyū out there and it is now in my bones, powers
the “Book of John,” powers this walk. No wall gonna keep that sea back but
I could haul everything importa nt in this world up any mountain in sight,
away from a thousand tsunamis and storms that would cover the earth a
thousand times over. That water would flow up and up and wash away so
much junk, once again wipe clean the towering shrine torii, take the homes,
the kissas, the sleeping barbers, take away the old watch shops and horrible
hotels and beaut iful old inns with adopted owners, and scrub away even the
ashen ghosts of fire and war, sure, but it’ll never touch us. It’ll never touch
these fucking feet.





EPILOGUE
When the waters recede—quicker than you might imagine—and  the curtain
of destr uction is pulled back, homes are atop homes, flipped sideways,
others vanished. Walls are toppled and roofs bent. Boats float down alleys.
As the waters pull back, the mountains of the bay, made weak, begin to
crumble. Whole trees fall into the ocean. The vacuum of the force of this
phenomenon does something strange: It sucks the waters away with such
energy that the ocean floor is revealed. For a brief moment the town is more
than it has ever been, doubled in size, the land carrying with it a strange
promise, possib ility extending to the very mouth of the bay. Time has
temporarily been  reversed. But do not go low. It is a trick. You need to go
higher still.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I began this book on a walk around Kii in May 2021, and planned on
finishing it in a twenty-one-day burst in September of the same year. Ha ha
ha! That deadline whooshed past. And then the next, and the next. The cast
of characters grew . Then shrank . Then grew again. Now it’s in your hands.
No small miracle.
First off: TBOT  itself is dedicated to Mizuki. Although we aren’ t bound
together legally , she lives forever in my mind as a daughter . I hope my
actions have reflected my feelings. Being a father figure in her life—
particularly when she was around the ages of eight to twelve—reconfigured
my brain in ways that will resonate indefinitely . Without her I would be so
much less. Many , many years ago I would tell her bedtime stories about
“my friend Bryan.” Her life force cracked open my heart in a way that
allowed me to go back to him, to revisit what we had and didn’ t have as
kids.
This book would also not exist without the friendship and support and
shrewd editoria l eye of Oli Chance, longtime pal. He’s one of the first
people I met after stepping off the plane at Narita in August 2000. It’s only
fitting he was so involved, so early on.
On the “busines s” side of things: A huge thanks to Andy Ward and Ben
Greenber g at Random House for being so enthusiastic (and contractually
flexible!) and willing to take a chance on this book. To my editor at
Random House , Molly Turpin, for asking roughly nine million critical,
generous questio ns, all of which I tried to answer in prose, and all of which
made this book stronger . And to David McCormick for his agently advice
and helping me navigate the dark waters of publishing’ s legal clauses.
Without John McBride I would n’t have started any of this walking. I’ve
spent months of my life walking side by side with him. So—thank you,
John, for opening up this world to me. Also, it was John who facilitated
permission to reproduce the ancient “passport.” The image is from the
collection of Laura Moretti at the University of Cambridge. The translation
is by students at the university’ s Graduate Summer School in Japanese
Early-Modern Palaeography (of which John was one, of course). Someday
we need to make the “Book of John” a real book, printed, out in the world.
Everyone’d be all richer for it.
Extra-big thank-you to David Cady for his copyediting eye and two
decades of friendship and hosannas. To Wesley Verhoeve, for helping me
sift through thousands of my photographs to find the ones for this book. To
Matt Blackstone, Carina Fushimi, Kusaka Hikaru, Sophie Knight, and Tyler
Walker for their support and eyes on early (and late) drafts of the
manuscript.
Collective thanks and cosmic  bear hug to the members of SPECIAL
PROJECTS , my indie mem bership program , which has enabled—financially
and spiritually—all the walking  I’ve done since 2019. This book wouldn’ t
exist without those members. I am still in awe of how many of you are out
there, and the weird-ass adventures we’ve gone on together .
Thanks, too, to MacDowell. Even though you’ve rejected me every single
time since my residency in Winter 2011–2012 (so many rejections!!), that
one stint you did offer me chang ed my life. What a place. What amazing
people. What cute little lunch baskets. Drafts of a few (small) sections of
this book were actually written there (Dad scenes: MacDowell cabin, fire
burning, piano occasionally plinked), if you can believe it or not. Anyway ,
I’m glad lots of other people are getting a chance to experience residency
there. If I had a billion dollars, I’d do everything in my power to sustainably
multiply your presence. (Oh, and sorry for throwing up in my cabin.)
And finally, thanks in no particular order to the following humans for
their continued guidance and support: Sam Anderson, Frank Chimero,
Lynne Tillman, Rob Giampietro, Kuripuru, Geor ge, Derek Bain es, Mina &
Joe, Serena & Aziz, Giamin & Kevin, Robin & Kathryn, Sayuri Ikeda, John
Gruber , Dan Frommer , Bin Sugawara, Hikari Ohta, Chris Palmieri, Matt
Romaine, Saul Griffith, Dan Greenspun, Adam Savage, Peter Collingridge,
Ethan Glasserman, David Marx , Jon Gray , and that okonomiy aki woman
who made me smile a little during that final truly shit day of walking.
Oh, heck—and finally finally finally  a special thanks to my mom, who in
a bout of surreal ist invention—while working at the airplane-engine factory
—began saving for college when  she was barely twenty . Not for her college
education—for mine. For a kid she didn’ t yet have or know , but imagined.
Whatever drove that specific impulse is a mystery . But for a kid in a
country that doesn’ t subsidize higher education, knowing that we had a little
bundle of cash earmarked for Life Beyond—well, that’s precisely the sort
of thing that allows a child’ s mind to soar. (Although I’m sure she wishes I
had soared a little closer to home.)
ABOUT  THE AUTHOR
CRAIG MOD is a writer , photographer , and walker living in Tokyo, Japan. He
is the author of Things Become Other Things  and Kissa by Kissa . He also
writes the newsl etters Roden and Ridgeline and has contributed to The New
York Times, The Atlantic, Wired, and more. In 2023 he wrote an
impassioned recommendation of Morioka, Japan, to The New York Times.
To the bafflement of everyone , the paper ranked the city number two
(behind London) for “Places to Visit in 2023.” This fluke turned Mod into a
minor celebrity . He sat for interviews with some forty or fifty newspapers
and TV shows, trying to explain the goodness of a city like Morioka, to
people for whom the goodness is so self-evident that it has become
invisible. This whole media dance culminated in his going on a two-day
walk around Morioka with one of Japan’ s biggest TV stars: the seventy-
nine-year -old sunglasses-wearin g Tamori-san, who was lovely (and very
tiny!). The response—a total heartfelt reverence for the avuncular Tamori—
from people on the street (“Good morning! Tamori-san!!” yelled
construction workers from atop their scaffolding) made Mod feel like he
was walking with John Lennon. Mod’ s moment of celebrity was mercifully
short-lived. Nobody recognizes him anymore when he walks around town.